H





The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  laid before the House the following resignation from the U.S. House of Representatives: Congress of the United States, House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 7, 1994. Hon. David Walters, Governor, State of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK. Dear Governor: In accordance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma, I am hereby notifying you that I resign from my duties as Representative of the Sixth Congressional District in the United States House of Representatives effective at 12 midnight, January 7, 1994. Sincerely, Glenn English, Member of Congress. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The Clerk will utilize the electronic system to ascertain the presence of a quorum. Members will record their presence by electronic device. The call was taken by electronic device, and the following Members responded to their names: [Roll No. 1] Abercrombie Ackerman Allard Andrews (ME) Andrews (NJ) Andrews (TX) Armey Bacchus (FL) Baesler Baker (CA) Ballenger Barca Barcia Barlow Barrett (NE) Barrett (WI) Bartlett Barton Bateman Beilenson Bevill Bilbray Bilirakis Bishop Blackwell Bliley Blute Boehlert Boehner Bonilla Borski Boucher Brooks Browder Brown (CA) Brown (FL) Brown (OH) Bryant Bunning Burton Buyer Byrne Callahan Camp Canady Cantwell Cardin Carr Castle Chapman Clayton Clement Clinger Clyburn Coble Coleman Collins (GA) Collins (IL) Collins (MI) Combest Conyers Coppersmith Costello Cox Coyne Crapo Cunningham Danner Darden Deal DeFazio DeLauro DeLay Derrick Deutsch Diaz-Balart Dickey Dicks Dingell Dixon Dooley Doolittle Dreier Duncan Dunn Edwards (TX) Emerson Engel English Evans Everett Farr Fawell Fazio Fields (LA) Fields (TX) Filner Fingerhut Fish Foglietta Foley Ford (MI) Fowler Franks (CT) Franks (NJ) Frost Furse Gallo Gejdenson Gekas Gephardt Geren Gibbons Gilchrest Gillmor Gilman Gingrich Glickman Gonzalez Goodlatte Goodling Gordon Goss Grams Green Greenwood Gunderson Gutierrez Hall (TX) Hamilton Hancock Hansen Harman Hayes Hefley Hefner Herger Hilliard Hoagland Hobson Hochbrueckner Hoekstra Hoke Horn Houghton Hoyer Huffington Hughes Hunter Hutchinson Hutto Hyde Inglis Inslee Istook Jacobs Johnson (CT) Johnson (GA) Johnson, E.B. Johnson, Sam Johnston Kanjorski Kasich Kennedy Kennelly Kildee Kim King Kleczka Klein Klink Klug Knollenberg Kolbe Kopetski Kreidler LaFalce Lambert Lancaster Lantos LaRocco Lazio Leach Levin Levy Lewis (CA) Lewis (FL) Lewis (GA) Lightfoot Linder Lipinski Livingston Long Mann Manton Manzullo Margolies-Mezvinsky Markey Martinez Matsui Mazzoli McCandless McCloskey McCollum McCrery McCurdy McDermott McHale McHugh McMillan McNulty Meehan Meek Menendez Meyers Mica Michel Miller (CA) Miller (FL) Mineta Minge Moakley Montgomery Moorhead Moran Morella Murphy Murtha Myers Nadler Natcher Neal (NC) Nussle Obey Olver Ortiz Orton Owens Oxley Packard Parker Pastor Paxon Payne (VA) Pelosi Penny Peterson (FL) Peterson (MN) Petri Pickett Pickle Pombo Pomeroy Portman Poshard Price (NC) Pryce (OH) Quillen Quinn Rahall Ramstad Ravenel Regula Reynolds Richardson Roberts Roemer Rogers Rohrabacher Ros-Lehtinen Rostenkowski Roukema Rowland Roybal-Allard Royce Sabo Sangmeister Santorum Sarpalius Sawyer Schaefer Schenk Schroeder Schumer Sensenbrenner Serrano Sharp Shaw Shays Shepherd Shuster Sisisky Skaggs Skeen Skelton Slattery Slaughter Smith (IA) Smith (MI) Smith (TX) Snowe Solomon Spence Stearns Stenholm Stokes Strickland Stump Stupak Swett Swift Synar Talent Taylor (MS) Tejeda Thomas (WY) Thornton Thurman Torkildsen Torricelli Towns Traficant Tucker Unsoeld Upton Valentine Velazquez Vento Visclosky Volkmer Vucanovich Walker Washington Waters Watt Weldon Whitten Wilson Wise Wolf Woolsey Wyden Wynn Yates Young (AK) Young (FL) Zeliff Zimmer {time} 1233
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  On this rollcall, 348 Members having recorded their presence by electronic device, a quorum is present. Under the rule, further proceedings under the call were dispensed with. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  Will the gentleman from Mississippi [Montgomery] come forward and lead the House in the Pledge of Allegiance.
 
The speaker is MONTGOMERY and he says  led the Pledge of Allegiance as follows: I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  laid before the House the following communication from the Clerk of the House of Representatives. Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 25, 1994. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, The Speaker, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: I have the honor to transmit herewith the certificate of election from the Secretary of State, State of Michigan, indicating that, according to the official returns of the Special Election held on December 7, 1993, the Honorable Vern Ehlers was elected to the Office of Representative in Congress from the Third Congressional District, State of Michigan. With great respect, I am Sincerely yours, Donnald K. Anderson, Clerk, House of Representatives. State of Michigan Certificate of Election We, the undersigned, State Canvassers, from an examination of the Election Returns received by the Secretary of State, determine that, at the General Election, held on the seventh day of December, nineteen hundred ninety-three, Vern Ehlers was duly elected Representative in Congress 3rd District for the term ending January 2, nineteen hundred ninety-five. In Witness Whereof, We have hereto subscribed our names, at Lansing, this third day of January, nineteen hundred ninety- four. (Signed) Board of State Canvassers. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  Will the dean of the Michigan delegation, together with members of the delegation, escort the Member-elect from Michigan, Vernon J. Ehlers, to the well of the House.
 
The speaker is VERNON and he says  J. EHLERS appeared at the bar of the House and took the following oath of office: Do you solemnly swear that you will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that you will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that you take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion, and that you will well and truly discharge the duties of the office upon which you are about to enter, so help you God.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  Congratulations, you are a Member of the House of Representatives. ____________________
 
The speaker is DINGELL and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute.)
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The Chair recognizes the dean of the Michigan delegation, the Honorable John Dingell.
 
The speaker is DINGELL and he says  Speaker, let me say to my colleagues that I have the privilege today and the great personal pleasure to introduce to this House its newest Member, who will serve with distinction and who has compiled already a remarkable record of public service, 9 years in the Senate of the State of Michigan, 2 years in the Michigan State House, and he has compiled a remarkable record with special concern over matters like environment and science. He will be a distinguished Member of this body, the Honorable Vern Ehlers. I would like at this time to yield to my good friend, the gentleman from Michigan, Upton.
 
The speaker is UPTON and he says  Speaker, I thank our Chairman for yielding. I would like to say before the House that this House loved two of its previous Members, Gerry Ford and Paul Henry. As Jim Ford, the Chaplain of the House, said earlier today, he asked us to pray for character and justice. Character and justice certainly reflect the words and the deeds of both Gerry Ford and Paul Henry, and I know that Vern Ehlers will fill those shoes, admirably so. ____________________
 
The speaker is EHLERS and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is EHLERS and he says  I wanted to thank the senior members of the Michigan delegation and the entire Michigan delegation for being present. I appreciate your support and the kind words that you have offered on my behalf. I hope I live up to those. I am very honored to be here, as I am sure you understand. I am also very humbled to be here, because I think this is a great responsibility that has been placed upon me by the voters of my district. {time} 1240 I will do my best to discharge that according to the precepts found in the page of the Bible I laid my hand on during the swearing in, Micah 6, verse 8. I have used that passage for every swearing in, and I pray that I will be able to walk humbly before the Lord and do justice and have mercy. I also want to comment that this is a very sad time for me surprisingly, but it is a very sad time because of my close friendship for Paul Henry, a wonderful person, a great man. And I hope that I can add somewhat to his legacy. I certainly thank him for being an example for me and for all of us. I will try to live up to his standards and precepts. This is also a time for thanks and thanksgiving, thanks to my wife, Jo, and my daughter, Marla, who are present here today, and a number of friends in the Gallery who have helped in a number of ways on the campaign, and also to the many others who worked and were not able to be here today. I certainly appreciate their presence, and I want to acknowledge that they are the ones who are responsible for me being here. My pattern was not an unusual one. I was outspent by tremendous amounts by my opponents, but I had the support of the people and the volunteers. And that is why I am here, and that is why many of my colleagues are here. I feel very fortunate to join the Michigan delegation, an outstanding group of individuals, most of whom I have known before. I look forward to working with them for the betterment of the great State of Michigan as well as for the benefit of the entire Nation. Finally, just as a personal note, I also like challenges. People could not understand why I would leave the Senate, where I was President pro tempore, and join the House of Representatives. To me, now that I am here, it is an easy choice. It is a great body, a strong sense of history, and I like the challenge that is presented coming here. I understand, I have been told that I am the first physicist to ever occupy a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. I hope there will be many more in the future, of course, but I will find that a challenge, to try to work on the science policy of this Nation and to improve it, to better it and use it for the furtherance of this Nation and the creation of a better technological society and more jobs for its citizens. I regard this as a positive opportunity, and I am very optimistic about the future of this Nation in many ways. Finally, Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues once again for allowing me the time to make these few comments and to conclude by saying, I welcome the challenge and I look forward to the opportunity. ____________________
 
The speaker is FORD and he says  of Michigan asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is FORD and he says  of Michigan. Speaker, I am honored and privileged to be where I am at this point in the Nation's history. We have an exciting and challenging President whose agenda is dear to my heart--improving the quality of life and the personal security of all Americans. As chairman of the Education and Labor Committee, I will devote myself tirelessly to his goals. I want to spend the next year here as a full-time chairman and an agent of change for President Clinton without the demands and distractions of an election campaign. After 40 years of public service, this year--my 30th in Congress--will be my last. My polls tell me that my district is a stronger Democratic district than it was 2 years ago and that my chances of reelection are excellent. But time has snuck up on me. As I approach my 67th birthday, it is time for me to focus on my remaining years. I want to spend more time doing the things I enjoy and concentrating on my family whose sacrifices because of my career have been immense and often painful. I began my congressional career with the Presidency of Lyndon Johnson and am proud to have been here during the enactment of many ambitious Great Society Programs. I leave in the President of Bill Clinton whose proposals renew the Johnson Legacy. Truly, I have seen the pendulum swing. To my colleagues, thank you for your friendship, your support, and the opportunity to realize the goal of my freshman year--the chairmanship of the committee I love. ____________________
 
The speaker is HUGHES and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is HUGHES and he says  Speaker, I rise today to inform my colleagues that yesterday, I announced that I have decided not to seek reelection, and that I intend to leave Congress at the end of this term. It was not an easy decision for me, because I love serving the people of south Jersey in this great institution. But, I will have completed 30 years of public service at the end of this session--10 years in the prosecutor's office in Cape May County, and 20 years in the Congress. What is particularly gratifying is that I have been granted the singular honor of serving the people of the Second Congressional District of New Jersey in the House longer than any person in the history of the district. That says a lot about the special relationship between us. Before I entered politics, I served with many outstanding men and women over the years on a hospital board, drug abuse council, service clubs, church groups, and other organizations, but I have never served with a finer group of people than we have in the Congress of the United States. The overwhelming majority of Members are decent, honest, God-fearing citizens who work hard to make their districts and their country a better place to live. It is sad that this institution is too often judged by the few who have another agenda. My 19 years in the Congress have been more productive and satisfying than I ever could have imagined. I have enjoyed working with my colleagues in the House. I have been blessed with ranking Republicans on my subcommittees, beginning with Hal Sawyer and ending with Carlos Moorhead, who have enabled me to accomplish a great deal as a national legislator, particularly in the areas of law enforcement and intellectual property rights. I am so gratified by the fact that my law to ban the dumping of sewage sludge and chemical wastes in the ocean is considered by many as an environmental milestone. I am equally proud of my record of accomplishments back home. Indeed, you can't travel anywhere in my sprawling second district without finding my imprint on a project to create jobs, protect the environment, fix up the infrastructure, or improve the quality of life which we cherish so dearly in southern New Jersey. I will leave Congress with my head high, knowing that I have done my very best, and that I have made a difference. Although I am sad to leave elective public office, I am very excited at the prospect of taking on some new challenges. My wonderful wife Nancy and I are blessed with good health. We have four beautiful children and five grandchildren who I want to spend more time with. Indeed, I am looking forward to teaching my grandchildren how to fish, and how to bait their own hook so I can fish too. I will miss this institution and take a lot of wonderful memories with me at the end of this year. I think the late Donald Adams put it best when he said: ``To give real service, you must add something which cannot be bought or measured with money, and that is sincerity and integrity.'' I hope that will be my lasting legacy. Thank you and God bless you all. ____________________
 
The speaker is de and he says  LUGO asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is de and he says  LUGO. Speaker, last Thursday, I told the people of the Virgin Islands that I would not be seeking any elective office in the coming election. I want to say goodbye to this House today, where I had the honor to serve as the first Delegate from the Virgin Islands ever in the history of our Republic. I came to this Capitol some 24 years ago. I was elected, as I am elected today, but I did not have a seat in the House. The Virgin Islands, the people of the Virgin Islands, did not have any representation in the House. I was a Washington Representative, and I served two terms in that position and was able, with the help of many of you who are here today, and particularly you, Speaker, and many of our friends who have gone, to get a seat for the people of the Virgin Islands. I have served some 20 years here. I have made wonderful friends on both sides of the aisle. I am a Democrat. I love the Democratic Party, but the truth is, as I have told the Members, some of my best friends are Republicans. They have been very helpful to me and to the people of the Islands. Speaker, I want to thank you not only the Members but also the staff here in the House that helps us so much, and so many have shown me kindnesses. I leave this House after almost 40 years in elective office. I look forward to going home. I am sure when the Members think about it, and I am from the Virgin Islands, they will realize that it makes a lot of sense for me to want to go home. I thank the Members very much, and I thank you, Speaker. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged resolution (H. Res. 325) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H. Res. 325 Resolved, That a committee of two Members be appointed by the Speaker on the part of the House of Representatives to join with a committee on the part of the Senate to notify the President of the United States that a quorum of each House has assembled and Congress is ready to receive any communication that he may be pleased to make. The resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The Chair appoints as members of the committee on the part of the House to join a committee on the part of the Senate to notify the President of the United States that a quorum of each House has been assembled and that Congress is ready to receive any communication that he may be pleased to make, the gentleman from Missouri [Gephardt] and the gentleman from Illinois [Michel]. ____________________
 
The speaker is WHITTEN and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged resolution (H. Res. 326) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H. Res. 326 Resolved, That the Clerk of the House inform the Senate that a quorum of the House is present and that the House is ready to proceed with business. The resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged resolution (H. Res. 327) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H. Res. 327 Resolved, That until otherwise ordered, the hour of meeting of the House shall be noon on Mondays and Tuesdays; 2 p.m. on Wednesdays; 11 a.m. on all other days of the week up to and including May 15, 1994; and that from May 16, 1994, until the end of the second session, the hour of daily meeting of the House shall be noon on Mondays and Tuesdays and 10 a.m. on all other days of the week. The resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged resolution (H. Res. 328) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the resolution, as follows: H.Res. 328 Resolved, That the House has learned with profound sorrow of the death of the Honorable Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., former Member of the House for 17 terms and Speaker of the House of Representatives for the Ninety-fifth, Ninety-sixth, Ninety-seventh, Ninety-eighth and Ninety-ninth Congresses. Resolved, That in the death of the Honorable Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr. the United States and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts have lost a valued and eminent public servant and citizen. Resolved, That the Clerk communicate these resolutions to the Senate and transmit a copy thereof to the family of the deceased. Resolved, That when the House adjourns today, it adjourn as a further mark of respect to the memory of the deceased.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley] is recognized for 1 hour.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, a little over 1 week ago, I stood in the State house in Boston and watched tens of thousands of citizens brave the subzero weather to pay tribute to ``Tip'' O'Neill. The people who waited in line were mostly ordinary people who remember Tip as their Congressman, their mentor, or as their friend. They were old and they were young. They were from Boston and Cambridge, and some came from as far away as California. Even the powerful people waited in line--the politicians from all over the country. The presidents of universities, the CEO's of big companies, and foreign dignitaries from all over the world. None of us wanted to say goodbye. None of us wanted to believe that this great big Irishman would ever be anything but full of life and full of fun. Many of you in this Chamber know that Tip and I were close friends. My wife Evelyn and I often socialized with ``Tip'' and Millie and always had a great time. He was the best--there is no doubt about that. And I will certainly miss him. In the days that have followed ``Tip's'' passing I have been especially pleased by the many young people--college students, and even high school students, who have approached me on the street, or called or written my office to say how much they admired the Speaker; or how impressed they were with his dedicated career; or how the Speaker's example has inspired them to pursue a career in public service. And I hope with all my heart that in the years to come we will see a lot of ``Tip'' O'Neills coming to the Congress or serving in State legislatures. They may not be as witty, they may not be as lovable, and they may not be larger than life--but I hope and trust they will be every bit as caring, compassionate, and decent as the Speaker who did so much for so many people. He was a champion, a real champion, for the seniors. He fought hard for the young people, and always believed that government had a responsibility to the poor and those without a voice. But one of his greatest legacies will be that he made people feel proud of government, and he made people realize government's potential. He loved this institution and he loved this country so very much. Another one of his legacies--and one of the things that will ensure that ``Tip'' will live forever--are the stories he used to tell and the stories we used to tell about him. We could not talk about ``Tip'' O'Neill without talking about the Henry Ford story. ``Tip'' told this story for 25 years. In fact, he told it so many times he once sat down with Danny Thomas and said, ``Gee, Danny, I have been telling this story for years and years, and I just need some new material.'' He said, ``You don't need new material, Speaker, you need a new audience.'' He said, ``The joke is great. Keep telling it.'' Many of the Members in the Chamber probably heard it. It goes something like this. Henry Ford was visiting Ireland, the birthplace of his mother. The Selectmen of the country came in to see him. They honored him, they welcomed him, and they told him they were building a hospital, and if he would be so kind to donate a sum of money in his mother's name, they would very much appreciate it. {time} 1300 ``Well,'' he said, ``OK,'' and he wrote a check for $5,000. The next morning in the local paper big streamlining headlines say ``Henry Ford Donates $50,000 to Hospital.'' Henry says, ``I only gave $5,000. How am I going to handle this? Well, the county officials came back in and said, ``Ford, we're very very sorry for that misprint, but don't worry about it, we'll put a retraction in tomorrow morning.'' So Henry says, ``Never mind the retraction. How much do you need to finish the hospital?'' He said, ``Ford, about $75,000.'' He says, ``I'll write a check for $75,000 on one condition, that you allow me to put a motto over the gates going into the hospital.'' The fellow says fine. We wrote the check for $75,000. And the fellow says, ``What would you like to have us put over the hospital?'' He says, ``Put this: I came amongst you and you took me in.'' And that is the Henry Ford story that Speaker O'Neill used to tell. But there are other stories that have been in books, and the one that Tip told me when we were golfing one time is about the 50th class reunion, the high school class reunion he went to. And in his class there was a fellow, a little fellow named Red O'Brien. So, there are about 25 people left in the reunion and Red finally spots the Speaker and he says, ``Tip O'Neill, I haven't seen you in 40 years.'' He says, ``What are you doing now?'' And Tip was the Speaker at the time. But he just took it good-naturedly, patted Red on the head and said, ``Oh, still working, Red.'' And that was the end of that. But one time the Speaker came into Logan Airport and he was met by his office staffer, Jim Rowen, and Jim had two 6-footers beside him, and Tip says, ``What's this?'' And he says, ``Speaker, there's been a threat on your life. These two people are State police officers and they've been assigned to take you home.'' He said, ``Well, I can't go home. Millie's not home. There's nothing to eat.'' Then he said, ``Let's go to Joe Tecce's.'' Well, Joe Tecce's is an Italian restaurant in Boston that is frequented by a lot of people in political life, and Joe is a character in the good sense of the word. So the Speaker walks into Tecce's with these two fellows by his side, and Joe, making sure everybody knew the Speaker was in the restaurant says, ``Speaker, my friend, Tip, how are you?'' Tip says, ``Fine, Joe. How are you doing?'' He said, ``Good.'' And the Speaker said, ``These two fellows are police officers.'' He says, ``Police officers? What are you bringing the police to my place for?'' And he said, ``Well, you don't understand, Joe. There's been a threat on my life, and these people are here to protect me.'' He says, ``There's been a threat on your life?'' He says, ``Angie, get the boys. I'm not going to have the Speaker killed in my place and blow my liquor license.'' Well, anyway, that is just part of the charm of Tip O'Neill. And as I say, stories will go on for years and years and years and years. He is like oceanfront property. They just do not make them anymore. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Washington, Speaker Foley.
 
The speaker is FOLEY and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman for taking this resolution to the floor of the House. Tip's death occurred at a time when the Congress was not in session, and this is the first opportunity that we have had, as a body, to recognize not only his passing, but his service. And, there will be opportunities in the coming days to have a memorial service for Tip O'Neill. I think of Tip always, as the gentleman from Massachusetts, [ Moakley] said, as a person of enormous humor and compassion and good will. I do not think any Member that I have served with in the last 30 years had as much real affection from other Members as did Tip O'Neill. He was not only their friend, but their counselor; and Member after Member sought his advice and counsel in time of difficulty and trouble. But his image was always one of enormous warmth and good feeling. I used to ride with Tip around the State as people would wave, and shout, ``Hi, Speaker.'' ``Hi, Tip.'' He told the story that, when he was having just a little bit of an argument with President Reagan, he went into a factory and one of the women at the machines in the factory said, ``Tip O'Neill, God love you, Tip, God bless you, and by the way, be a little easier on President Reagan.'' He was a Member who always thought about his own district and his State; he never forgot from whence he came. He was the man from Berry's Corner. He was the man from Boston. He was the man from Massachusetts. His concern with the young, with the elderly, with those who are less favored in our society, marked his public service from his first days in the great and general court of Massachusetts, where he was the first Democratic Speaker, to his last day in this House. He never forgot his roots. He never forgot those values and concerns that brought him into public life, and marked his public service, every day, in this Chamber of the House of Representatives. Tip was probably the first internationally known Speaker. In fact, in some sense he was perhaps the first Speaker of true national recognition, as great as were his many predecessors, and we all remember with great respect Sam Rayburn and John McCormack, and presently of course, Jim Wright and Carl Albert. It was not until Tip became Speaker that people in the country recognized the Speaker of the House of Representatives. I do not think that I could have taken John McCormack down the streets of my home city of Spokane with the expectation of everyone recognizing him; and, if I had served with Sam Rayburn, I do not think the people of my constituency would have recognized him either. But Tip was known everywhere. He was a national and international figure who was recognized around the world. His service to his people, to his district, to his State, and to the Nation will be remembered for many many decades. In fact, I think he has found his place in the permanent history of this House of Representatives. He was devoted to his family and to the community. He was devoted to his school of Boston College. He was devoted to the country from which his ancestors came. He was the first Speaker, American Speaker, to visit Ireland. And all during the time and troubles of the last 20 years he was a constant voice for peace and reconciliation in Ireland. He was an outspoken opponent of those whose bullets and bombs threatened the lives of Irish men and women from either great tradition in Ireland, and he always spoke in support of peace and reconciliation. It is a sad thing to think that Tip perhaps missed what I hope the coming months will bring, a final peace in the land of his and my ancestors. Let us pray that it is granted. For me, Tip O'Neill will always be Speaker. So, today we say, ``Farewell, Speaker. You will never be forgotten.''
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  I thank the Speaker. Speaker, I yield to a dear friend of our late Speaker, the minority leader of the House, Michel. (
 
The speaker is MICHEL and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is MICHEL and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding, particularly following the current Speaker, to say a few things with respect to our dear friend, Tip O'Neill. The Speaker just made mention of probably our first nationally known and recognized Speaker. And I think there were certain personal characteristics or physical features of the Speaker that made that quite prominent, that big shock of hair, and let us face it, he was not the thinnest man in the House, and that bulbous nose. But I tell my colleagues that we all, from this Member's point of view, got to love the Speaker in a very special way. I want to compliment the distinguished chairman for the tenor of his remarks in eulogy to the Speaker at the funeral. {time} 1310 I thought they were so appropriate and right on target. Since the gentleman was the only Member who spoke at this eulogy, he did speak for all of us on both sides of the aisle. I have since written several pieces, one for Roll Call, entitled ``An American Original.'' Then we did a piece for the Washington Times, ``Tip O'Neill: The Last Proud Liberal.'' For me that last is something special: I came to the House when Speaker Rayburn was the Speaker. I can recall those days when I was in awe as a junior Member of this man who presided over the House and who did it with such evenhandness, who gained the respect of all of us who served with him those days and subsequently the Speakers with whom I have served. Yes, it was a very special period with Tip O'Neill because, quite frankly, we both came into the position of leadership of our party at the time that he was the Speaker. We have all heard the stories of the Speaker's arguments, maybe a little bit stronger from time to time, with the then-President, President Ronald Reagan, with whom I was serving and whom I served as his point man. We would go around and round on the issues on the floor of this House during business hours, and I think everybody, maybe not all of the general public out there, but Members of this House, understood that that is the way this House is to operate. Yes, there were bitterly partisan arguments back and forth--and there is nothing wrong with that because this is the House that ought to be deliberating and the sharpness of the arguments ought to be all that more clearly defined when we have those spirited arguments. But I guess the one thing I always enjoyed so much and respected the Speaker for was that as soon as we had the motion to adjourn, we did not need but a few minutes afterward and then all things were forgotten and we could be friends again. [From the Washington Times, Jan. 7, 1994] Tip O'Neill: The Last Proud Liberal (By Representative Robert H. Michel) On May 7, 1981, Speaker of the House, Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., came to the floor of the House to close debate on what was known as the ``Graham-Latta'' budget substitute. In effect, the House would be voting on reversing the course of decades of liberal economic policies. Tip stood before the House, hushed as it always is on those rare occasions when a Speaker comes to the floor to debate. Most of what Tip said was predictable, a defense of liberal economic policies of the past. But he surprised me--and a lot of other members--when he said: ``Sure, in the 1970's my party made mistakes. We over- regulated. There was too much red tape and probably too much legislation. And we paid for it at the ballot box last year . . .:'' It isn't every day when a party leader makes such admissions, particularly when he is a fiercely partisan leader like Tip. And then, in words that reflected the sadness he felt at seeing New Deal and the Great Society economic assumptions fighting for their political life, he said: ``Sure we (i.e., Democrats) admit there were inequities and we had failures along the line and we paid for them . . .'' Despite his plea to the Democrats, who were in the majority, the Latta substitute won overwhelmingly, 253-176. It was the end of an era. Tip would go on to fight--and win-- another day. His party rebounded dramatically in the House elections of 1982, giving him the kind of political muscle he needed to make counter-strikes against the Reagan White House. But something had happened on that spring day in 1981, and Tip, with those great political instincts that made him so successful, knew what it was: Democrats would continue to win political victories, but liberalism--full-blooded, bottled- in-bond, take-no-prisoner, New Deal/ Fair Deal/ New Frontier/ Great Society liberalism--was politically dead. Tip was the last of the proud liberals. No equivocations (i.e., calling himself a ``progressive'' as some liberals were doing) for Tip: he as a Massachusetts liberal without apologies and without regrets. This authenticity and lack of pretense, this refusal to truckle to the ideological fashions of the day, were the qualities that later in his career made him a national celebrity, and, after his retirement, a well- loved (and, as he enjoyed telling me, with great gusto, well paid) figure on the lecture circuit and on television. In an age of blow-dried television personalities and high-priced political consultants, Tip was himself, the real thing, not decaffeinated or (to use a word never associated with Tip) ``lite''. It is by now a twice-told tale that Tip and I were golfing buddies and liked each other personally. Such heretical behavior was, and, I guess, remains, a scandal to the politically orthodox in both parties, but Tip and I enjoyed each other's company too much to be greatly concerned. We strongly disagreed on almost every major issue, from the invasion of Grenada to the Reagan tax cut, from Central American policy to the leadership qualities of President Ronald Reagan. But I could go to the Speaker's office at any time, sit with him, and just schmooze a bit, as they say. We could talk to each other--and we listened to each other. That may not seem like much, but, given the thousand-and-one difficulties of legislating, it is something to value dearly. He was, all in all, quite a character, not just the ``big bear, scarred by years of battles'', as one reporter put it, but the last representative of a great philosophy of government. To say that liberalism was great is not to say it was, in my admittedly biased view, good, but only that at its height of prestige and power, it changed the nature of our government and our country. Tip was proud of having been part of that, but toward the end of his career, all that could be heard of the liberalism he loved so much was its ``melancholy, long, withdrawing roar''. [From Roll Call, Jan. 10, 1994] Tip O'Neill: An American Original (By Representative Robert H. Michel) On the morning when the death of Tip O'Neill was announced, I was asked by ``Good Morning America'' to come on the show and say a few words about my old friend. Given the circumstances, I did the best I could, and talked about my affection for him as a man and about our friendship. When I returned to the office, one of my staff, knowing how sad I felt about this great loss, said to me: ``Don't worry Bob. Tip and Sil Conte are looking down on us and playing a game of pinochle or gin rummy right now.'' That cheered me up, because it was a reminder of the good old days when Sil and Tip and I would be together on a Congressional delegation trip overseas and, during the flight, gleefully battle each other in card games, enjoying ourselves immensely. There we were, two Republicans and a Democrat, a mid-west conservative of the Ev Dirksen persuasion, a Eastern Republican moderate, and a bred-in-the- bone, unabashed Massachusetts liberal of New Deal-Fair Deal orthodoxy. We had as many differing opinions on politics as you could imagine--but we were good friends and respected each other and had great times together. In the House, after Tip and I had spent the day fighting hard in a partisan fashion, we enjoyed each other's company, on the golf course, or perhaps over a few beverages of our choice. Now Sil and Tip are gone. The laughter and the kidding, the undisguised passion for politics, the easy camaraderie and the unspoken, but deeply felt sense that public service can be a worthy calling were shared by us all. I don't want to leave the impression that all was sweetness and light between Tip and myself. He could be awfully tough. In the middle of one House debate, during the Reagan years, Tip came to the floor to argue the issue (I think it was the Graham-Latta bill) and suddenly he was talking about some project for my district that he said would be endangered by my vote. Now that's hardball! So the worst thing we can do for Tip's memory is to remember him as that cuddly old guy with white hair who was so great in those television commercials after his retirement, the media celebrity who once appeared (``acted'' is not quite the word) on the popular sit-com, ``Cheers'', a kind of grandfather figure of American politics. Sure, Tip had all the charm of a legendary Irishman who had smooched the Blarney stone, and, in fact, he did look like someone from central casting ready to play the role of a twinkle- eyed-Irish-American pol. But that was only one part of his personality. He could be, and often was, as tough and unrelenting a partisan political opponent as any I have seen in 37 years in the House. Don't get me wrong--I would have had it no other way. I believe that democracy is best served when we present the differences between the parties as starkly as possible, and in my view Tip's combativeness was in the great tradition of House debate. All I'm saying is that we do Tip an injustice if we concentrate on the St. Patrick's Day charmer who could tell a story or a joke with the best of them, including President Ronald Reagan. Politics was no joke to Tip, and he didn't become Speaker of the House to charm people, but to promote and defend, as best he could, the political principles he deeply believed were in the best interests of his constituents and this country. And what a job he did. His greatest tests as Speaker and party spokesman came during the fierce battles over taxes, the budget and Central American policy that marked the first administration of President Ronald Reagan. Those who were not in the House at the time may find it hard to believe the turmoil and the excitement of those days, when it appeared that nothing could stop the Reagan juggernaut. As the only elected leader of his party in Washington, Tip fought us on every front. Some in my party made the mistake of underestimating Tip, as if his lack of the conventional telegenic qualities and his image as an unrepentant believer in liberalism, made him an easy target for our attacks. Tip proved to be a formidable opponent (helped, I might add, by an equally formidable majority in the House). There were some, on both sides of the aisle, who simply could not understand why Tip and I could have such cordial personal relations. After all, we had profound differences in political philosophy--why didn't we have each other? The failure to understand how a personal friendship can remain and even flourish amidst the hottest partisan controversies is, in my mind, a sad commentary on what has happened to politics in our time. In any event, I will miss Tip, and I hope when my time comes, Tip and Sil reserve a place at the old card table for me. I guess we have made mention of the acumen the Speaker had for dealing with the cards and playing them close to his vest when he thought he had to. He loved playing golf, and of course this Member has also had many pleasurable days out there on the golf course. Even in his latter days when he was suffering as he was from his medical impediments, he still wanted to walk down that course and get that old feel of the golf course. So there are some things we could say about our dear friendship at this time, but I think I pretty well captured him as best I could in the two articles I have written. So, Speaker, without taking further time of the many Members who would like to speak, in the limited time allocated for this occasion, I submit those two articles for the Record.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, at this time I yield to a very dear friend of the Speaker. I know the Speaker and I, when we were out golfing, his name would come up and we would be telling stories. Actually, he is the third member of the trio of O'Neill, Moakley, and Rostenkowski, the gentleman who sang ``Danny Boy,'' on the Wall of China, Congressman Rostenkowski.
 
The speaker is ROSTENKOWSKI and he says  I thank the gentleman for yielding. Speaker, I want to join Speaker Foley, my colleague, the gentleman from Illinois [Michel], in actually commending our colleague, Moakley, on the fabulous dissertation. Actually, Tip O'Neill was a jovial host and a great individual. As a matter of fact, having attended the ceremony when we put Tip to rest, it would have been, in my opinion, the kind of a gathering that Tip O'Neill would have wanted to have had. It was a sorrowful occasion, yet it was a celebration. Tip, I know, more than any one of us, loved good times. As our colleague, Bob Michel, has pointed out, there were bitter fights here on the floor of the House of Representatives, but at 5 p.m., as he mentioned, as he told Ronald Reagan, ``You know, we are all Americans and we are all here to try to run a country.'' There were tough times then. So I think it is appropriate, I suppose, that we take this time in the House from the schedule to remember a man who led us so long and so well. But it also leaves me both uncomfortable and sad because this House feels so different now that Tip O'Neill is gone. He added a human and personal touch that has been in short supply after his retirement. Analysts talked about his politics, his legislative leadership, but I remember best and value most his friendship. I have received a few honors in my career up here but the one that made me proudest was when Tip started calling me ``pal.'' I knew then that I made the cut and had been accepted as a player. Today we tend to talk about focus groups, media messages; Tip viewed politics from a different perspective. He thought politics was about helping people, particularly people who desperately needed help. Tip knew that the strong can take care of themselves, sometimes all too well; that it was the weak who deserve our help. In that regard, his message was a moral message rather than a partisan, political one. But I do not want to remember him as a ``holy Joe,'' because he certainly was not. He took pleasure in his work, he properly saw an enormous amount of humor in the theatrics we all engaged in from time to time. He never took himself too seriously. It did not surprise me when he punctuated his retirement by popping out of a piece of luggage in a television commercial. As a golfer, he accepted the fact that we seldom move in straight lines and that the trip can often be as interesting as the destination. I miss my pal, Tip O'Neill; I suspect we all do. Our institution is a different place without him, and so are our lives. But, you know, when on the occasions that we were frolicking, Tip would walk across the room, put his arm around an individual, usually a lady that he had known or a cousin of somebody that he knew, and say, ``God love you, darlin'.'' Tip, wherever you are, God love you, darlin.'
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts [Markey].
 
The speaker is MARKEY and he says  I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts, [Moakley] for calling this very special session. The words spoken by Moakley at the funeral, and by his son, Tom O'Neill, who delivered the most beautiful eulogy I have ever heard in my life, and perhaps one of the three or four most beautiful speeches I have ever heard in my life on any subject--and the subject was Tip O'Neill. As with the gentlemen from Illinois [Rostenkowski], and the gentleman from Illinois [Michel], every person here has special memories of Tip O'Neill. When I was elected to Congress in 1976, I came down here as an Irish Catholic, Boston College graduate, but part of the reform movement ready to meet an Irish Catholic, Boston College, in a month to become speaker of the U.S. Congress, someone who had been elected in 1936 as a State representative in the State of Massachusetts. There were many other names that were floating around who had already seen their time pass in this institution. The Members of 1974 and 1976 were committed to ensuring that they would no longer serve in positions of power. The amazing thing about Tip O'Neill was that he was as relevant and as vibrant to the times of 1976 as he was to the times of Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the mid-1930's when he was elected for the first time. {time} 1320 And, when he left on his last day in 1986, he was just as relevant to the Ronald Reagan era in U.S. politics; so much so that even today, when most Members refer to the Speaker as in: How is the Speaker doing, they are referring to Tip O'Neill. Now that is a human being, a personal genius, that that growth, that ability to adapt to each time, each group of people, regardless of their philosophy, regardless of who they were, would be a part of his approach to life, and it did not make any difference whether it is the Black Caucus, or the Women's Caucus, or any of the reformers who came along. They soon came to realize that he would be extremely respectful of any views which they sought to present. When I first walked in, Tip brought me into the office, and he said, ``You know, I know your reputation from the State legislature.'' He said, ``You know, they threw your desk out in the hall, caused a lot of trouble up in the State legislature, but, Eddie, trust me, trust me. You won't understand what I'm saying right now, but the longer you are here, the most you're going to like the seniority system.'' And, as my colleagues know, the wisdom of the ages being passed down, within a year we were debating the issue of the engery bill. President Carter had asked Tip to form a single energy committee, and now we came down to whether it was going to pass by one vote or not on the floor, and he came to me up there in the back, and he said, ``Eddie, I really need your vote here on natural gas deregulation. We are very close; I have to get it done.'' And I said, ``Tip, I just don't think I can be with you.'' And he said, ``I really need your vote.'' And I said, ``Tip, I've studied this issue. I really don't think you're right on this.'' He said, ``I really need your vote.'' I said, ``I don't know if I can be with you. When you are right I'll be with you.'' He said, ``Eddie, I don't think you understand. When I'm right I don't need you.'' At each juncture in my career, as Dan Rostenkowski said, as he would come over and put that big ham hock of an arm around you and begin to explain some of the wisdom of the ages, you would realize that it was just as relevant in 1936 as it was in 1976 or 1986, or on the day he died. He died as one of the great Americans of the 20th century, and in my opinion he will go down as one of the 10 great politicians of the 20th century when people come back to chronicle his time here in this institution and what he meant to this country. What an honor it was for me to have served in this body every day that he was Speaker.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley]. At this time I yield to a dear friend, the gentleman from Massachusetts [Frank].
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I thank the dean of our delegation who was himself so close a friend and so important an ally to the late Speaker, Tip O'Neill. Speaker O'Neill was an extraordinary man of such enormous dimensions that no one can cover all parts of him. I think it is especially relevant for us today to think about those aspects of his career which, frankly, go very counter to some current public assumptions. One of the popular items we hear about today is term limits. Well, Tip O'Neill came to Congress in 1952, and I am told six terms is the usual on limits. I find it hard to believe that many people think America would have been greatly improved if Tip O'Neill would have left the Congress in 1964 instead of being able to stay here, gone off, and done something else. We have people talk about Members of Congress who like the life, who stay because it is easy, because it is so comfortable. Well, Tip O'Neill, leaving in his seventies, after 50 years of very hard and very dedicated public service, which it was to him and which he embodied, he then began the life of comfort. Tip O'Neill, as he would tell you, made more money in the few years after leaving Congress, probably, than he did in the 50 years in which he stayed in elected office. He did not ask for any particular gratitude for that. He did what he loved because helping people, trying to make this a fairer world, was what he loved. But in every aspect of his career he showed, I think, that some of the current cynicism is inappropriate. People like to guard themselves against the accusation that they are naive, and one of the ways people try to dodge being accused of being naive is to assume the pose of excessive skepticism and cynicism. Well, Tip O'Neill again was a great reputation of that. People will say, sometimes mockingly of someone else, ``Oh, he doesn't really understand politics. He thinks it's all on the level.'' Well, nobody knew more that it was on the level than Tip O'Neill, and nobody tried harder to keep it on the level than Tip O'Neill in the level and the most important way. As the chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means said, he is a man who figured that the talented, and the assertive, and the intelligent, and the skilled, that they did do well in this society, that we have a country in America in which, if one is able and skillful they will be rewarded. But he worried about people whose luck was not as good, who maybe were not born as talented as some others, and he felt that it was his job as a public official to try and not even everything out. He was no leveler, but he was someone who thought you put some limit on the extent to which people in trouble were allowed to suffer. No one did more than he to accomplish that. My colleague, the gentleman from Massachusetts [Markey] spoke before me, and he said he will be listed as one of the great political leaders of this century, and I do not think there is any question about that. He will be listed in the history of parliamentary institutions as one of the great parliamentarians, a man who understood this peculiar institution of an elected legislative body in a democracy, who knew how to make it work for the right reasons, who had a peculiarly impressive combination of skills, of intelligence, and personality, and commitment, and amiability and toughness when he had to. I remember once when we had a vote on seating a Member in a contested election, and I voted not to seat the Democrat, and people asked me, ``How did the Speaker respond?'' I said, ``Well, Tip was mad at me until I explained myself, and then he got furious because he understood that he had a responsibility as a leader that somehow sometimes transcended what individuals might have to do that did not make us right and him wrong, but it meant that he had an extraordinary perspective that was, I think, essential to this place. He played a role at a critical time in the 1980's that only now are people fully appreciating as an exemplar of his a citizen serves his fellow citizens in democracy. Tip O'Neill was an extraordinary human being. Those of us who served with him, now considerably less than half the House, by the way, are privileged to have done so, and I appreciate the chairman of the Committee on Rules giving us a chance to tell him publicly how much we do appreciate having had that chance.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield to the gentleman who took Speaker O'Neill's place in the Congress and whose family has been entwined with the Speaker over the years, the Honorable Joseph Kennedy. (
 
The speaker is KENNEDY and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is KENNEDY and he says  First of all, Speaker, let me thank the gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley] for providing all of us with the opportunity to pour out our stories and our memories of Tip O'Neill. Joe Moakley did a job at Tip's funeral that I will never forget, that nobody who attended that funeral will ever forget. It was a very tough time for Joe because he lost one of his closest friends, but he told stories that brought an audience that was full of grief and sadness to laughter, and to smiles, and to loving memories of an individual that they, too, loved. Joe, you did a great job, and we were all very, very proud of you that day. I always felt a little in awe of Tip O'Neill because, for one thing, he seemed to always know all the members of my family better than I did. That was not always necessarily a positive development, but, in any event, he never, as I think most people that got to know Tip understand, he never made you feel badly. He always had a way of, despite the fact that in 1946, when my Uncle Jack was running for the Congress, he refused to endorse Jack Kennedy, the fact that he and my dad never, I think, really saw very much eye to eye, which he was very blunt about and never apologized for. {time} 1330 The fact that there have been so many different fights that all of them had taken on over the years still never got in the way of Tip's support, kindness, and fundamental friendliness toward our family. If there is one individual in American politics that I think the family is more delighted to be associated with, it is truly Speaker O'Neill. I had the privilege of running for Tip's seat when he decided to retire and I remember going down to his home at Harwichport when I was thinking about running to ask his advice. Millie met me at the door, and Tip put his arm around me, and at that point I knew I was going to be all right. Tip sat and told me story after story of the various labor unions in the district that you could count on and the few that you could not count on. He went through every city and town, every precinct, every ward, telling how our district was put together and saying who would be with you and who would not be with you. He was just an encyclopedia of information. I remember when we were going around the district in his final days, I went around to a few of his stops, and he stopped one evening off of Barry's Corners, and there were probably 300 or 400 people in the room who had been supporters of Tip's. He went around the entire room and mentioned the individual relationships, brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers and cousins. He knew every single person in that room in such great detail that he made everyone think he was their best friend. What I loved about Tip was his quality where he never took someone's station in life as having anything to do with their importance. Someone could be a king, a president, or the head of an armed forces, and they would be just as important as a neighbor in Cambridge. They would be just as important as all the people he grew up with. I heard him give a speech one time where he was telling the entire audience about when he first ran for public office. He said that at that time a policeman in the United States--I remember his words--used to work 106 hours a week, a fireman worked 108 hours a week, and none of their kids could possibly hope to gain a college education. There was no Social Security, there was no Medicare, there was no Medicaid, there were none of the programs that we as a generation of Americans simply take for granted. Those all came about while Tip O'Neill was elected to this body and to the Massachusetts State Legislature. He saw America change. He saw this country create a middle class. The changes that took place in Tip's lifetime are the kinds of changes that any individual, particularly Tip O'Neill, would be so proud to have happen under his guidance and under his tenure and with his mark. Tip made a mark. He made a mark that I think is significant to all of us, and that mark is that we are all here as equals, that no one is bigger than another, and we are all here, particularly as Members of Congress, to stand up for working people and the poor whose viewpoints so often do not get heard in Washington, DC. That is the legacy that Tip has given us. That is why I think he brings such a strong memory out of such stalwarts and strong individuals who have gone through so much and who have stood up for so much, such as Danny Rostenkowski and Joe Moakley. These are not people who easily come to the funeral of another politician and come to their memories with a tear in their eye. Both of them have shed tears for Tip O'Neill. For the memory that you have given us and for the memories that Tip gave us, I thank you all.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts [Meehan].
 
The speaker is MEEHAN and he says  I witnessed a tremendous tribute to Speaker O'Neill at his memorial service in North Cambridge. Joe Moakley told stories that made everyone watching understand why theirs was a friendship that stood the test of decades in the House. Tip's son, Tommy, delivered a powerful eulogy that evoked the human side of Tip: a great father, a great politician, and as a great friend of ordinary working men and women. I first met Tip O'Neill in 1979. I was a staff assistant for a young Congressman from my district, Jim Shannon. Jim Shannon had been elected to the Congress at the age of 26. He came to Washington, as Tip O'Neill's protege. In fact, he had written his thesis on Tip O'Neill. Jim went over to the Speaker's office to ask him about his committee assignment, and Tip O'Neill asked him what he would like. He said, ``I would like a seat on the Ways and Means Committee.'' He was a 27-year- old freshman. Tip said, ``We'll see what we can do.'' Tip was retired by the time I was elected to Congress, but that did not stop him from teaching me a thing or two about Congress and public service. A little more than 1 year ago, just after I had won the Democratic primary, I was at a fund raiser for the State committee up in Massachusetts, and my job was to introduce Tip O'Neill. I started talking about how Tip had served under five Presidents. That seemed to me pretty impressive, and I meant it as a compliment. But Tip then got up, he looked out at me and said, ``Marty, I know you are just starting out and I know you have just won your first primary and your first election, but with all due respect, I have to correct you. I didn't serve under any Presidents; I served with five Presidents.'' So he made me think about our obligation as Members of the legislative branch to preserve the power of Congress as a co-equal partnership with the executive, and more generally he made me think about the importance of exercising independent judgment on behalf of our constituents. He will be remembered as a great father, a great politician, and a great friend of ordinary working men and women. Speaker, I again thank Congressman Moakley for providing this opportunity for giving such a tremendous tribute to former Speaker Tip O'Neill.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts [Blute].
 
The speaker is BLUTE and he says  Speaker, I want to thank my friend from Massachusetts [Moakley] for giving me this time to pay tribute to Tip O'Neill. I want to join all the members of the delegation to pay tribute to a man the likes of which we may not see again in our lifetime, former Speaker Tip O'Neill. I join with my colleagues from the Bay State in putting forth this resolution expressing the profound sorrow of the House of Representatives upon his passing. Although I am a Republican, I am also an Irish-American who cut his political teeth in the Massachusetts House of Representatives over which Tip O'Neill presided many years ago. The Speaker's legacy is long and great in the State House in Boston, and those who serve in the legislature there to this very day feel the power and the influence of the gentleman from Cambridge. The mark he left on that body will not soon fade from memory, but what is even more impressive is for me to come down here to the Nation's Capital and to the floor of the U.S. House each day and reflect on the stature of such political giants as Tip O'Neill, the power he wielded for so many years and the wisdom and passion with which he wielded that power earned him the respect and admiration of his fellow citizens of the United States and moreover of people all over the world. He was one of the most recognizable figures in the annals of American politics in the 20th century, and he was also one of the most revered. As a graduate of Boston College, the Speaker's beloved alma mater, as a former State representative at the statehouse in Boston, and now a Congressman from Massachusetts, I am truly saddened at the loss of ``Tip'' O'Neill. He set the standard for what public service should be, and he will be sorely missed. I urge unanimous passage of this resolution, and I thank the gentleman from Boston [Moakley] for allowing me this opportunity.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the honorable gentleman from Massachusetts [Torkildsen].
 
The speaker is TORKILDSEN and he says  Speaker, I would like to thank the gentleman from Massachusetts, [Moakley], the chairman of the Committee on Rules, for yielding time to me. Speaker, it is with certain sadness that I rise to honor a giant in politics in my home State of Massachusetts and throughout America, Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr. Here, as in Massachusetts, Speaker O'Neill was known by his nickname, ``Tip,'' even as he held one of the most powerful positions in the free world. That tells a lot about the man. He sat with leaders of nations around the world, yet treated everyone the same, with compassion, concern, and respect. Tip's most famous remark was ``All politics is local,'' and he remembered that. Tip knew that government ought to be caring, and that all the regulations in the world didn't give anyone in government an excuse to be uncaring. Even though he didn't say so, Tip knew that all politics was listening, too. He would listen to anyone who wanted to speak with him, not only Presidents and colleagues, but also to the people he loved, police officers and cobblers, teachers and retired folks. No matter who you were or what you had to say, Tip listened. I did not know Tip as well as many people here. But the few times I spoke with him, Tip always listened, and recalled a story or two. The first time I met him, I mentioned I was from the town of Danvers. Tip immediately recalled the name of a friend of his from Danvers, a friend who had helped him out some 30 or so years before. I thought it remarkable that after all those years, Tip would remember someone, and not someone who Tip had helped, because even then Tip had helped hundreds of people. Tip remembered someone who had helped him. Tip also didn't shy away from controversy, or a fight, if that was what was needed. As the current Speaker of the House mentioned, Tip O'Neill was the first Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, ever. He did not become Speaker because he rode on someone else's coattails, but because he worked at it, even when a lot of so called experts said it could not be done. Perhaps our best tribute to Tip will be to remember not only him, and the stories he loved to tell, but also to remember what Tip practiced. All politics is local. All people deserve to be treated with respect.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the honorable gentleman from Massachusetts, Olver.
 
The speaker is OLVER and he says  Speaker, I would like to start by thanking the dean of our Massachusetts delegation, Moakley, for organizing this opportunity to join with my colleagues from Massachusetts in tribute to a great speaker and a truly great man, Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill. For those of us who live in Massachusetts his passing is especially sad. I offer my condolences to his entire family. As a young man growing up on the streets of his beloved North Cambridge neighborhood, Tip learned the compassion, the caring and the integrity that were the hallmarks of his long and distinguished career in public service. He rose to become the first Democratic speaker of the Massachusetts great and general court, a body in which I served for 22 years. From his election in 1952 to his retirement in 1987, the people of the Eighth Congressional District of Massachusetts chose Tip O'Neill to represent their interests in the U.S. House of Representatives. It has been said that the Speaker never forgot his roots. The sting of his defeat in an election to the Cambridge city council spawned his often repeated quote ``All politics is local.'' The famous quote, that came from his father, served as his guiding principle. He always asked for your vote and offered his record as evidence for why he deserved it. He may have been the Speaker of the House, but he was still the same man the people sent to Washington. To say that Tip O'Neill never forgot his district is too simplistic, because although his job took him out of North Cambridge, North Cambridge was never taken out of the man. The Speaker never forgot that the people of Eighth Congressional District of Massachusetts depended on him. He was a true champion of the people. Whether it was helping a veteran receive a due benefit or making sure that legislation moved in the House, Tip O'Neill was a man of action. He believed that the Government could help those that needed help and fought every day for those that were left behind by the American dream. It has been said that the Speaker was the last of a kind, that his type of personal politics has been cast aside. I hope that on the streets of the Eighth Congressional District there is a young man or woman who uses the Tip O'Neill Library on the campus of Boston College, or is taught by a Tip O'Neill Professor of Political Science at Northeastern University, or even plays golf on the Tip O'Neill course in Cambridge and is spurred to act, spurred to study the man, his actions, his deeds and most importantly his enormous heart. If just one man or woman tries to fill the enormous void left in public service by his passing then his work will truly be done. The next generation of political leaders will come of age when they study the man from North Cambridge who we will always lovingly remember as Speaker.
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from New York, the Honorable Ben Gilman. (
 
The speaker is GILMAN and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is GILMAN and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding. I want to commend the gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley] for giving us an opportunity to reflect on the public service of a great man, a great Speaker, Thomas ``Tip'' O'Neill. Speaker Tip O'Neill left his mark not only on our Nation, but virtually on all of us, on both sides of the aisle, who served with him in the Congress. I had the privilege of serving in the House with Tip during the last 14 years of his public service. Tip always had a good word and sound advice for all of us as he helped to enhance the reputation of this great body. I among with many of our colleagues will long remember Tip's good humor, his warmth for his colleagues, his touching renditions of ``Danny Boy,'' his bear hugs for our spouses, and his Solomon-like leadership in conducting the business and judiciously moderating the rancorous debates of this House Some observers have called him the last of the old time politicians and, at the same time, the first of the new political leaders. His colorful style and his strong convictions made him an admired effective leader. ``Tip'' O'Neill had a framed saying on the wall of his office which proclaimed that the main responsibilities of Government were to take care of people at the dawn of life--our children, at the twilight of life--our senior citizens, and in the shadows of life--the ill, the needy, and the handicapped. We will long remember and long miss this giant of a man.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield such time as she may consume to the gentlewoman from Connecticut [Kennelly].
 
The speaker is KENNELLY and he says  Speaker, I rise today to remember another Speaker, and a dear friend, Tip O'Neill. I know I express what is in so many of our hearts when I say that not one person who served with Tip was untouched by his warmth, his humor, and his kindness. Tip O'Neill was a special kind of public servant. He took tremendous joy in the game of politics. But he respected--no, he revered--the institutions of our democratically elected, representative government. Rough and tumble as this House can be at times--and rough and tumble as Tip himself could play--Tip never forgot that this is the people's House. Our business is the public's business; our mission the public good. Tip knew in his bones that was that our U.S. Government was of the people, by the people, and for the people. And people weren't some abstraction. Economic statistics weren't people. Long-term projections weren't people. Pie charts and bar charts and flow charts weren't people. People were the men and women he met everyday--whether he met them in the marble Halls of the Congress or on the streets and sidewalks of Cambridge. His mission was to do the best he could for them, and to make sure that Government existed to serve them and their needs. Tip's kindness was legendary. I myself arrived in Washington after a special election. I was the single-most junior Member. But Tip made it his business not only to welcome me, but to get to know me. Because Tip loved people, he listened to them. We know that he listened to his own children enough to believe them about the Vietnam war, and to oppose a President of his own party as a result. He listened to the new Members of Congress after the watershed election of 1974, and so was able not only to recognize, but to be part of the changes that swept the Congress. And he listened to his colleagues and his constituents, and so was able to be a successful and beloved Speaker. His love of people infused all his relationships, and no one who served with Tip will ever forget his warmth. I will miss him enormously. Thank you, dear friend of Speaker O'Neill--Joe Moakley. {time} 1350
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from South Carolina [Derrick]. (
 
The speaker is DERRICK and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is DERRICK and he says  Speaker, I rise to say a few words about Tip O'Neill. Tip left Congress 7 years ago, much longer ago than it seems. It's almost a shock to think about. Measured by a congressional timeframe, 7 years is almost an eternity. Here in the House we get things done, put them behind us, and move on to the next thing--we do it over and over again. The years can seem like a headlong rush with little chance to look back and ruminate. Things change fast while we're immersed in the daily tussle and wrangling our work propels us into. Even between sessions our time and energy is occupied with work back in the home district. When Tip stepped down from the Speaker's chair we said our farewells--and hit the ground running. He had been Speaker for 10 years and had left his indelible mark on this institution, but we still had the work of Congress to do. We didn't look back for long. More than most things could, Tip O'Neill's death stopped us cold. Those still here today who worked with him or against him have their personal memories of the man. As an institution we have his portrait hanging as a memento. There are the accounts and testaments of his career recently published in newspapers and magazines, broadcast on radio and television, and recorded in our own Congressional Record. Sad as it may seem, as time passes all that will remain of the man who we remember so vividly and personally will be these sort of public records. He will become part of our Nation's public history, a sort of collective identity, remembered the same way we remember a Longworth or Sam Rayburn. However, his presence as a man and his life's work will live on with a vigor and vitality rarely achieved by any man or woman. Who he was, what he believed, and how he expressed it lies encoded in the House of Representatives as it exists today and in the public laws of the land. The man he actually was has become an actual part of collective political identity reembodied every time we come together for business. It may be an anonymous, more diffuse existence, but Tip O'Neill hasn't stopped being with us since he left 7 years ago.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Klink). Without objection, the gentleman from Massachusetts [Frank] is recognized for an additional 60 minutes.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from Michigan [Bonior], the majority whip.
 
The speaker is BONIOR and he says  Speaker, I, too, would like to add my praise to my chairman, the gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley] for his eulogy and his celebratory tone and his capturing of the man at Tip's funeral. It was an incredibly moving experience to hear him and Tip's son. I got to know Tip in a very strange way. I would like to share that with my colleagues, if I could, for just a second. When I got here in 1976-1977, Tip had just become Speaker. I was advised that a good way to learn how this place worked would be to go the whip meetings down in Congressman Brademus' office, which is my office now. And I felt, as a new freshman, really uncomfortable and out of place and wondering what this place was all about. I would wander down there, and I would bring a newspaper and kind of sit in the corner. And Tip would be sitting up front, and he would also be reading the newspaper. He had that big stogie in his mouth, and it occurred to him, at one point, that we were reading the same part of the newspaper. We were both reading the sports section. Eventually, he figured out that I was reading the same part of the sport section he was reading, and that was what the spreads were on the football games that were coming up on Saturday. So we got to talking about whether BC was favored or whether Iowa was favored or Michigan was favored or ``who do you like in this game, who do you like in that game.'' We developed a relationship based on something that was very common but satisfying to both of us. After about a year of this, I got up enough nerve to ask Tip to come to my district to do a little bit of campaigning for me. He agreed to do it. So when he flew in, I did not know how to meet him, because I did not have a big car. My father did not have a big car. And so we had this big debate on how to pick Tip O'Neill up at the airport. So my father said to me, ``Why don't you just get Stan Shultz to pick him up?'' I said, ``Okay.'' Stan Shultz is the undertaker in town. He buried my father and my family, good friends. Sure enough, Stan shows up with the hearse, big Cadillac, and we picked Tip up. He actually got a big kick out of that. On the way to the fundraiser, my dad, who loves sports and is as fond of the ponies as Tip was, occasionally, got to talking about horse racing. And I was sitting in the back seat with my father. Tip was in the front seat with Stan. And they were reminiscing about politics and horse racing. And all of a sudden, Tip was trying to remember the name of this great horse that won the Kentucky Derby in 1970-something, 1972. He said it was a Canadian horse. I do not know horses from beans. But for some reason, the name of Northern Dancer popped into my head. And I said, ``It was Northern Dancer, Speaker.'' And he turned around in the front seat of the car, and he looked at me as if to say, you are on the right track, young man. And we had a wonderful, close relationship for all these many years. I think to me the story that best sums up what Tip O'Neill was all about comes from Frank Minelli. Back in his Boston neighborhood, Frank Minelli was also known as ``Frank the Barber.'' And he is the guy who cut Tip's big white mop for over 40 years. One time Tip invited Frank and his wife to come to Washington to visit, and he would take them around on a tour. As they were touring the Capitol and walking around, a colleague of Tip's came up to him and said, ``Tip, I have got this important big city mayor waiting in my office. I would like you to come and meet him.'' Tip looked at the Congressman. Then he looked at Frank and his wife. And he turned back to the Congressman with the big city mayor waiting and said, ``Not now, I have got more important people.'' That story, I think, says just about all one needs to say about Tip, as so many Members have so eloquently said before me this afternoon, because to Tip O'Neill, ordinary people, ordinary citizens were the most important part of his life, of his constituency. He, as the gentleman from Massachusetts [Kennedy] has pointed out, and as the gentleman from Massachusetts [Frank] and others, he was not there to fight for the rich and the powerful. They have got enough friends around here to do that for them. He figures they could pretty well fend for themselves. Tip was here to fight for the Frank Minelli's of the world. He paid attention to ordinary people. He listened to them. He worked for them, and he gave them a voice when they had no other. Tip called his book ``Man Of The House.'' But I have always thought that a more accurate title would have been ``Man Of The People,'' because he dedicated his life to leaving that ladder of opportunity up for all Americans to climb. And he was so proud to talk about how he was present and active in Government when the American middle class was made. {time} 1400 When we think about it, he was quite an incredible part of the history and the dynamics of modern history, to have been present in this society, particularly, when the middle class was created, not with his finger in the wind, but with his feet planted firmly in stone. He never wavered on those basic principles for ordinary folks. In the months ahead, as we head into this Nation's difficult times, crime, welfare, health care, job creation, I hope we can all carry on where our ``Tip'' O'Neill left off, and dedicate ourselves to improving security in the lives of all Americans. If we do that, in the end, that will be our highest tribute that we can pay.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from North Carolina [Rose].
 
The speaker is ROSE and he says  Speaker, I first want to say that at the funeral in Boston of my late friend, ``Tip'' O'Neill, I witnessed one of the most beautiful outpourings of love and affection for one of the most real people that we have every had the pleasure to know in the Congress of the United States. However, the crowning glory of that entire day, for me, was the speech of the gentleman from Massachusetts, Joe Moakley, about his best friend, ``Tip'' O'Neill. Joe Moakley is the successor to the legacy of ``Tip'' O'Neill. We all share parts of that legacy. Joe was his best friend in this House. The way the words came out of his mouth and, through smiles and tears, as all of us were choking up, he painted the beautiful story of a real man who was not afraid to help his friends, who was not afraid to put a family together within the House of Representatives, to treat us like we were around the table as his children, at the dining room table, and moderate between us the things that we needed versus the things that we wanted. He led this House by example, as a strong father leads a large family. I will always love him and remember him for that. I will always love the gentleman from Massachusetts, Joe Moakley, for putting down for posterity the greatness and the love of this man that he was so close to. I came here in 1972. After the election I came here to look the place over. Hale Boggs had just had a tragic accident and death in Alaska. ``Tip'' O'Neill was quietly seeking freshman votes to be the new majority leader of the 93d Congress. I went to his office, and back in a corner, Leo Diehl in his chair with his crutches at his side, ``Tip'' O'Neill in another chair, all the freshmen pictures laid out on the table, mine over in the corner, I could see it. I said, ``Whip, I have a problem. I need to be on the Committee on Agriculture to properly represent my district.'' He said, ``Son, I got a problem, too. I want to be the majority leader of the House. If you will help me become the majority leader of the House, I will see the best I can that you get on the Committee on Agriculture.'' I was the first freshman in the 93d Congress to endorse ``Tip'' O'Neill for majority leader. He never forgot that. He made me an example of things that he would give me an opportunity to do. His passing is a tragic loss to all of us, but we must keep his memory alive and the spirit of this man ever before us, as we seek to rescue this House of Representatives from its lowest public opinion rating that it has probably ever had. Speaker, subject always to the final approval of the chairman, the gentleman from Massachusetts, Moakley, I have introduced today House Resolution 329, a resolution that designates 1994 as a year to honor the memory and leadership qualities of the Honorable Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., the late Speaker of the House of Representatives: Whereas the death of the late Speaker of the House of Representatives, Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., on January 5, 1994, has created not only a personal loss to his many friends and colleagues, but also a great loss to the Nation; Whereas Speaker O'Neill, is remembered by all for his dedication to good government and his love for the people of the United States; Whereas Speaker O'Neill's compassion and goodness of heart and his spirit of cooperation and conciliation were evident to all who knew him; Whereas in the House of Representatives and in his life, Speaker O'Neill's personal charm and political skill transcended differences of personality and party; Whereas Speaker O'Neill presided over the House of Representatives from the Ninety-fifth Congress through the Ninety-ninth Congress and emerged as one of the greatest American political leaders of this century; and Whereas it is appropriate that the House of Representatives rededicate itself to the principles of leadership personified by Speaker O'Neill: Now, therefore, be it Resolved, That 1994 is designated as a year to honor the memory and leadership qualities of the Honorable Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., the late Speaker of the House of Representatives. I hope that my colleagues will consider joining me in this. I plan to speak at a time for myself reserved tomorrow just to go into this again and explain it further. I want to thank the delegation from Massachusetts, and especially its dean, for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. We all need to remember what ``Tip'' O'Neill stood for.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from New Mexico [Richardson] a Member whose roots are from a similar place but who strayed from Boston, but who is forgiven. (
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  Speaker, what is very obvious is that while ``Tip'' O'Neill passed away, the ``Tip'' O'Neill family is very much alive. We see it evidenced here in the gentleman from Massachusetts [Moakley] and the Massachusetts delegation, and many other political figures around the country who ``Tip'' O'Neill baptized in politics, with the axiom that all politics is local. What we also get in the seal of approval with the ``Tip'' O'Neill family is a variety of very capable staff people. We get folks downtown, we get Irish figures with many talents from not just the Northeast but here in Washington, DC. We get an extended family that takes care of us. If ``Tip'' O'Neill put his arm around you, then that family always was with you, not just his wife, Millie, but his son, Kip. Speaker, it was Kip O'Neill that probably did the most important thing for me politically. That is, because of our friendship, he got his father, the Speaker, to campaign for me in New Mexico at a time when I had absolutely no chance of winning. My first race I lost, but ``Tip'' O'Neill came to New Mexico. We made him ring doorbells. He was not pleased with that. When I was elected, I was with trepidation fearing ``Tip'' when he told the story that I made him ring doorbells and left him on a tarmac without a private plane, as I had promised. Both stories were embellished a little bit. Over the years they were embellished a little more. However, when he put his arm around me when I was elected and sworn in, I knew that the O'Neill mantle of approval was there, and with that you got this enormous wealth of people and kindnesses, and entrees into this city. Speaker, I want to thank the gentleman from Massachusetts, Joe Moakley, and I want to thank the O'Neill family, especially Kip, and the extended political family that includes Andy Athy and many others, for their courtesies. ``Tip'' O'Neill lives on through them.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, before the very distinguished majority leader wraps up for us on behalf of the House, I yield such time as he may consume to the gentleman from New Hampshire [Zeliff]. {time} 1410
 
The speaker is ZELIFF and he says  Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to just say a couple of words about a good friend, Tip. I did not serve here in this great body until 1990, so I did not have a chance to be here while Tip was Speaker of the House. But I certainly saw what he did for Boston and what he did for New England, and especially what he did for New Hampshire. And I had the privilege 2 years ago to be out at Andrews Air Force Base at a congressional golf tournament. We had two Democratic lobbyists, and there was supposed to be a second Republican who did not show up. And Tip came on board and came up and said, ``Bill, do you mind if I join you?'' And I said, ``I would be honored, Speaker.'' And he came on board. And he had on the end of his putter a little suction cup. And I did not know what the suction cup was until he got a couple of long putts, but some of them were 6 feet, some of them were 8 feet. And I knew I was supposed to be representing the Republican side of this thing. But I found out a different meaning for the phrase unanimous consent, Speaker, and that old suction cup went to work. And I tell Members, about the 9th or 10th hole, I came up to him and we got to know each other pretty good. And I said, ``Speaker, how's life treating you?'' He put his arm around me and he said, ``Billy, anytime the good Lord lets you open your eyes you are treated very, very well.'' We had a chance to talk about Millie and his family and politics, and everything is local, and politics is local, and toward the end he called to the photographer and he had a picture taken. And he put his arm around me and he said, ``Some day you might be able to use this.'' And I just feel very honored that Tip spent that little bit of quality time with me as a Republican. He was not plastic; he was very real. That probably is one of the most wonderful occasions I have had since I have been a Member of Congress, and I am proud to say that I had a little bit of time with him. And I put him right up on the top of my mantle of people that I want to strive to be like because I think he is everything that we all should be about. I thank the gentleman for letting me take this small part.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from New Hampshire. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume, and I yield to the gentleman from Missouri [Emerson].
 
The speaker is EMERSON and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and appreciate this opportunity to say a final word of farewell to Speaker O'Neill. My memory of him goes back many, many years. I first arrived here as a page in the last Republican Congress. I do not think there is anyone here on the floor who may even remember when that was. But it was in 1953, and Massachusetts was then very much in the limelight. The Speaker of the House, Joe Martin, was from Massachusetts, and the Democratic whip was then John McCormack, Sam Rayburn being the minority leader. I do not remember a lot about Speaker O'Neill when he was a freshman Congressman. That was the year in which I was a freshman page. But over the years I became a staffer, and ultimately a Member. I can remember many, many things about him. As a student of the House, I always loved it when he was in his story-telling mode and would talk about the great characters of the House. But I will always remember an act of personal kindness that he extended to me when I was a very, very freshman congressman. I think I had not been here more than 6 months, when one day I was sitting on the floor and the Speaker's page came to get me and said, ``The Speaker would like to have a word with you.'' And I said, ``My goodness, what have I done? Why should I be summoned by the Speaker?'' So I went to the Speaker's chair, and he said to me, ``I just wanted to tell you I met your daughter the other day and what a charming girl she is.'' And it turned out that she worked as a waitress at a club where Speaker O'Neill liked to play golf. And she had introduced herself to him, and he had remembered that and took the time when he came back here to tell me about it. Ever after, whenever I would see the Speaker in the lobby, or walking through the corridors around here, or whereever, I would say, ``Hello, Speaker,'' and he would always say, ``And how's your charming daughter?'' He never forgot, for all of the years that intervened, he never forgot my charming daughter. And I will remember long and well his attention to such small details, which I am sure are a part of what made him the great Member of Congress, the great public servant, that he was.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from California [Fazio]. (
 
The speaker is FAZIO and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is FAZIO and he says  Speaker, much has been said about the fact that Tip O'Neill was a man who knew where he stood. He knew what he believed in, and he voted his district. He was a man who was rooted in his community of Cambridge, and a man who came from a strong family and a tradition of public service. He was partisan without being rancorous. He was the kind of leader who actually appealed to every Member of this body during the 10 years he was Speaker and the many years he served before then. He will be greatly missed not just by his wonderful family from his wife Millie, children Susan and Rosemary, Kip and Tommy and Michael, but all of us whom he made feel as if we were family. We were all his pals, his darlings. He was the kind of man who rarely finds a home in public office, but when he does, makes a mark that will never be erased. My wife Judy and I loved him and will miss him very much.
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, to finish this well-deserved tribute, it is certainly appropriate that another great leader of the House of Representatives, the distinguished majority leader, the gentleman from Missouri [Gephardt] be yielded the balance of our time.
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding, and I am very happy to be part of this event of paying our respects to such a great American who has left us in the last days. A number of us were involved in a mission and trip to Asia at the time of Speaker O'Neill's death, and we were not able to be at his funeral in Boston as we would have liked to have been. And so on behalf of all the Members who were unable to be there that day I want to rise today to pay our respects to this great American. I came to the Congress in 1977, January, when Tip O'Neill became Speaker. I would simply say that he had an enormous influence not only on his constituents in Massachusetts and in his State, but he had an enormous influence on all of us who served with him in the House and on generations of people who met him and knew him here in the House of Representatives, and as my friend from Missouri just said, even pages who met him in their time here. There were two kinds of values or ideas that he stood for that I will never forget. One was that he always told us, both Republicans and Democrats, but all of us as public servants that all of politics is local. He was famous for that phrase because it is such a true phrase. All of us understand that what we do here is interesting and important, but if it does not relate directly to what people see, feel and hear at home, it really is of no relevance to the people who are our boss, our constituents. And that contribution of just that phrase and that sentiment, that idea I think is a very, very important thing in America's political life. The second thing about him that I think is an everlasting influence was that he was a man of great compassion, a man of great caring, a man of great kindness, and really human love. There was not a person who served with him who did not feel that warm compassion. He was a friend of every Member that he ever served with. I can still, as if it were yesterday, see him sitting in one of these chairs right over here where he would do office hours on the floor. He never refused to talk to anyone. He was always an open ear. He was always full of counsel and advice and good will, and for that everyone truly loved their relationship with him. Finally, because of that human characteristic that he had of responding so warmly to his fellow colleagues, he had an ability that I think is very much needed in any legislative body, and certainly in this one, and that is the ability when the time comes as the leader that he was to listen to all of the fractious viewpoints, to hear everybody out, but then to say I have heard you all but this is what we are going to do, and then importantly to be able to get enough of us to come in behind him to do it, not always because we agreed with him, but because we liked him, we trusted him, and we trusted his leadership. We knew that he had given us a fair hearing and that he had made the best decision he could. Harry Truman once said leadership is getting people to do things they do not want to do. Tip O'Neill was a leader because he had the human characteristic, the personality, and the character that all of us could respond to when we needed to, and therefore he was a magnificent leader of this institution and this Congress. {time} 1420 He will be missed by his family. He will be missed by his constituents. And he will be missed by everyone here who knew him. He was a great American, a great Speaker, a great leader, and we will always remember the contribution and the human kindness and love that he brought to everything he did in his life. ____________________
 
The speaker is RAHALL and he says  Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Honorable Thomas ``Tip'' O'Neill. Without any doubt, Thomas ``Tip'' O'Neill will be written up in the history books as the one of the greatest Speakers we have ever known. Tip O'Neill was elected by his colleagues to be their Speaker in 1976. It has always been my great personal pleasure to have been sworn in as a Member of the House in 1976, and to have begun my public service under his tutelage. I had much to learn about the work of the People's House, and Tip O'Neill was a grand and excellent teacher. He served as Speaker for a decade, retiring in 1986. But his public service to the people of Massachusetts and this Nation began in 1936-- 40 years before his term as Speaker began, and 50 years before he retired from office. Throughout this half-century and more, he was a man of the times. He was as attuned to the needs of his country when Franklin Delano Roosevelt took office as President, as he was when Ronald Reagan took office--and he never gave up his principles no matter who was in the White House. From Roosevelt to Reagan, Tip O'Neill never forgot, and always practiced, his deep belief that ``all politics is local.'' While serving as a national leader in his own right as Speaker of the House, and in earlier leadership positions he held, he never for a minute forgot who sent him to Washington--the folks back home whom he loved and revered. He was devoted and dedicated to the needs of middle America. There was one saying attributed to Tip O'Neill--one of literally hundreds of sayings attributed to Tip O'Neill--which I took as my own and have practiced ever since: If a constituent calls your Washington office and tells you of a problem he has with City Hall, don't tell him or her to call City Hall. You call City Hall yourself and take care of the problem. He has been greatly missed since his retirement as we have gone about the busy schedule of the House of Representatives, but he has still been with us--still leading us, in absentia, by the example he set. He was always available to advise us if we asked, and often when we didn't. Since leaving office, he was surely available to us through the books he has written about his lifetime of public service, books which should be required reading by every person, young and old, who aspire to or who want to learn about public service, about compassion and caring, about the legislative process, about humankind, about true leadership. And if you want to learn about how to be a faithful and loving husband and father while going about an entire lifetime of commitment to the Nation's needs, you have only to look at the life of Tip O'Neill. To his loving and caring wife, Millie, and to his beautiful children, we say thank you as well. He was good and kind. He was tough and irascible, almost any human dynamic that can be assigned to man, can and should be assigned to Tip O'Neill, and it was this that made him a leader, and that made him a friend to all of us. ____________________
 
The speaker is NEAL and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, it is an honor for me to take part in this tribute for our dear former Speaker, Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, who died just as the new year began. That news was a sad ending to the holiday season for many of us. I would like to thank Chairman Joe Moakley for reserving this time for us to honor Speaker O'Neill's memory. I did not have the pleasure of serving here in the House under Speaker O'Neill, but I can say that I was able to benefit from his advice and counsel in the years that I knew him. We spent time together at many Massachusetts functions over the past 5 years and I was truly touched by the interest he took in me and my progress as a new Member of Congress. Speaker O'Neill was well-known for his story-telling ability. I found that when he recounted an incident from his career or something that happened here on the Hill, there was always a lesson to be learned. His stories were warm and full of humanity, much like the man himself. I do not have many pictures up on the walls of my office, but one I treasure is Speaker O'Neill greeting me with big smile and a hug. We hear so much today about what a chore politics has become. Elected officials are ``disillusioned'' and the public has ``lost faith'' are just two of the phrases we hear over and over. That was not the case with Tip O'Neill. He truly enjoyed the business of politics. There are many politicians who do not enjoy the day-to-day business of meeting people and dealing with their problems and concerns on a personal level. There was nothing Tip O'Neill enjoyed more than working his district and his neighborhood. He would ask people what was on their minds and delight in the give-and-take of political discussion, whether on the House Floor or in a corner coffee shop in North Cambridge. Perhaps only Hubert Humphrey of his generation enjoyed his work as much as Tip. As sad as the funeral was on January 10, there was also that feeling that we were celebrating 81 happy years of life. To truly enjoy one's work, and to also be a master at that career, is a rare combination. Tip O'Neill was the embodiment of that combination. There is another lesson to be learned from the life of Tip O'Neill: He treated all people with the same respect. It did not matter if you were the head of state of a foreign country or simply a neighbor of his--he gave the same respect and interest that all men and women deserve. That is why so many people thought of him as a close friend. He genuinely cared about people and made it his business to do what he could to help those in need. Today we are celebrating a great American life in politics by noting the major accomplishment of Tip O'Neill's career. The history books will record his 50 years in public office and 10 years as Speaker of the House, but thousands of people will remember Tip because of the small things he did over the years: A kind word at a family funeral, help in finding a lost Government check, a phone call to congratulate a scholarship winner, getting a military case settled, a personal tour of the Capitol building. The list could go on and on. Tip O'Neill was a big man on the stage of American history, but it is through these little acts of kindness that we will best remember him. People are saying that Tip O'Neill's passing is the end of an era. Perhaps that is correct, but I hope the new era has a place in it for the quality we closely associate with Speaker O'Neill: compassion. As long as we remember to keep compassion in politics, we will be honoring Tip O'Neill. Speaker, again I thank Chairman Moakley. I would also like to express my condolences to Millie O'Neill and all the members of the O'Neill family. ``Speaker'' will be greatly missed.
 
The speaker is PELOSI and he says  Speaker, I rise today in fond memory of Tip O'Neill. With his passing, our Nation lost a great leader and this institution lost a large piece of its heart and soul. Ask most Americans who they think of when they think of the U.S. Congress, and their answer still would likely be Speaker O'Neill. In so many ways, he embodied the best of Congress, and the best of the American people. Speaker O'Neill's passionate commitment and dedication to the democratic process left an indelible mark on the lives of so many. He understood the importance of, believed in the ability of, and fought for a government of the people, by the people, and for the people. Tip's energy was poured into improving the everyday lives of working Americans. He instinctively understood that the true and best role of Government is in helping those who need help. He never forgot those people. He never forgot his roots. And, he never forgot his friends. I offer my warmest condolences and support to Millie and his family. Our lives were all improved by knowing Tip. We will long remember the humor, the warmth, the diplomacy and the fighting spirit of Tip O'Neill.
 
The speaker is KOPETSKI and he says  Speaker, I rise with great respect and admiration for Tip O'Neill and to join my colleagues in commemorating his service to the House of Representatives and our Nation. Speaker O'Neill's passing is a historic loss to this Nation and I offer my condolences and warm personal thoughts to the entire O'Neill family. The former Speaker's death was noted throughout our country. For the Record, I include a column from the January 16, 1994, issue of the Oregonian. [From the Oregonian, Jan. 16, 1994] If We Could Call One Final Witness (By Steve Duin) Tip O'Neill, a hefty argument against term limits, died before they went on trial last week in Seattle. The five-term speaker of the House reached his limit, at 81, in a Boston hospital on Jan. 6. Cancer knocked him down; a heart attack finished the job. Rep. Mike Kopetski, D-Ore., was on one of the four planes that carried House members to O'Neill's funeral Mass in Cambridge. He was one of the lucky ones who slipped inside St. John the Evangelist, the small brick church where O'Neill was baptized, but Kopetski never got comfortable. Bunched outside in the cold, Kopetski knew, were hundreds of mourners who had a better claim to his pew. They were constituents, and Tip O'Neill never shut his door to a constituent. Joseph Dinneen once wrote that the burning ambition of an Irish kid was to get to work: ``Then he could join the gang on the corner and live.'' In his 34 years in Congress, O'Neill never forgot the gang on Barry's Corner in North Cambridge, or their kids or their kin. As John Gimigliano--John the Cobbler--told The New York Times, ``He was my favorite friend. He invited me to Washington. He says, `I got the red carpet here for you. When you come, you get to walk on it.''' That a red carpet exists anywhere on Capitol Hill galls many term-limit fans; they'd like to jerk it out from under the tenured residents of Congress. Take Don McIntire, who didn't see the contradiction Thursday night in ripping O'Neill while sipping single-malt Scotch. ``Tip O'Neill is an excellent argument for term limits,'' said McIntire, a property-tax-limit gladiator in Oregon. ``No one more than Tip O'Neill typified the imperial Congress. The best argument for term limits is the Congress and its sorry history.'' Those fighting words would earn McIntire a bloody nose on Barry's Corner, but they are popular sentiments at McCormick & Schmick's. O'Neill didn't seem all that imperial to the bricklayers and cab drivers on the bar stools in Cambridge. They knew him too well; he came home too often. McIntire has a general aversion to political candidates. ``What's gone wrong,'' he said, ``is that we have governments where candidates make a difference. We should have a system where it doesn't matter which ding-dong gets into power because they can't hurt you.'' Then there's Sherry Bockwinkel, who headed the campaign for term limits in Washington, the passage of which House Speaker Tom Foley, D-Wash., is challenging in a Seattle federal court. Bockwinkel's rage was originally directed at her congressman, Norm Dicks, a Democrat who's been locked on the Hill for 17 years. She thought he was a lousy environmentalist, a warmonger and a victim of his own arrogance. On more than one occasion, the voters disagreed. So Bockwinkel campaigned for term limits. ``We want regular people in Congress, not elitists,'' she said. ``We left England because we didn't want a dynastic ruling class. We're being ruled by the very people we had a revolution over.'' The revolution is still on, and members of Oregon's delegation are on different sides. Rep. Elizabeth Furse, one of the 110 new members to Congress in 1993, believes terms limits are the only way to dismantle a seniority system that holds back women and minorities. Rep. Peter DeFazio has his own term-limit bill, although he noted, ``We don't have a problem in Oregon. We automatically limit people. We've thrown out Wayne Morse, Al Ullman and Denny Smith. Oregon is very adept at rejecting people.'' That penchant for rejection gained Kopetski a seat in Congress, but--even as he exits--he rejects term limits. ``I don't think people understand what they're doing,'' he said. ``They're giving more power to lobbyists, congressional staff and federal agencies. You can't control the staff, or the lobbyists, or the bureaucrats. You only have a direct say on your legislator.'' Tip O'Neill believed that if long-term commitments were a vital part of a marriage, they were a positive aspect to his relationship with the friends he left behind on Barry's Corner. ``I used to be for term limits,'' said Jim Peterson, a longtime family friend and one of the pallbearers at O'Neill's funeral, ``but I jumped over the fence. He asked, `Do you want to get rid of the farmer, the doctor, the teacher as soon as they've gotten up to speed? It doesn't make any sense.'''
 
The speaker is HUGHES and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to one of the true giants in American history, the late Speaker of the House, Tip O'Neill. There is no one who I admired more throughout my political career than Tip O'Neill. He embodied everything that was good about politics and public service. Tip had a sense of right and wrong, and an understanding of politics, like no one I have ever known. I was very fortunate to have gotten to know Tip O'Neill during my first term in office, when he was serving as majority leader. I learned so much from him. His years in Government gave him the perspective, and the political instincts, which enabled him to see way beyond what most others saw occurring in the political arena. That is what made him so effective as a leader. As a person, he was a one-of-a-kind. On the outside, he was big, gruff, and intimidating, but on the inside, he was a sweetheart of a guy. He took a personal interest in everyone's problems, from his constituents at home to his colleagues in the House. Tip made you feel special for he talked just to you. It was this enormous generosity which really defined Tip as a person, and endeared him to everyone he knew. I will never forget the years he came into southern New Jersey to campaign with me. Tip knew that I represented a largely Republican district, and that most of my supporters were business people and others who were generally more conservative than him. As a result, he was always unsure what to say. I always told him, just be yourself. Invariably, it would take Tip all of 5 minutes before he had the audience wrapped around his finger. He would start by pleading guilty to being a liberal and a big spender. Then once the audience got over the shock, he would explain to them what he meant: That he believed in spending more money on education, Social Security, cancer research, wastewater treatment, and so many other programs that are important to people, and which improve the quality of life in our country. By the time he was finished, people would be lined up to shake his hand and tell him how much they appreciated him. That is the Tip O'Neill that I knew: A man who was generous, funny, true to his beliefs and blessed with the natural instincts and attributes of a great leader. There will never be another Tip O'Neill. His loss was a great one for our country, but his legacy will always live on. I am grateful that I had the opportunity to get to know and work with this truly wonderful man.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Klink). The question is on the resolution offered by the gentleman from Massachusetts [Frank]. The resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks on the resolution just agreed to.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Massachusetts? There was no objection. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, your committee on the part of the House to join a like committee on the part of the Senate to notify the President of the United States that a quorum of each House has been assembled and is ready to receive any communication that he may be pleased to make has performed that duty. The President asked us to report that he will be pleased to deliver his message at 9 p.m. tonight to a joint session of the two Houses. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged concurrent resolution (H. Con. Res. 197) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the concurrent resolution, as follows: H. Con. Res. 197 Resolved by the House of Representatives (the Senate concurring), That the two Houses of Congress assembled in the Hall of the House of Representatives on Tuesday, January 25, 1994, at 9 p.m., for the purpose of receiving such communication as the President of the United States shall be pleased to make to them. The concurrent resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair desires to make an announcement. After consultation with the majority and minority leaders, and with their consent and approval, the Chair announces that tonight when the two Houses meet in joint session to hear an address by the President of the United States, only the doors immediately opposite the Speaker and those on his left and right will be open. No one will be allowed on the floor of the House who does not have the privilege of the floor of the House. Due to the large attendance which is anticipated, the Chair feels that the rule regarding the privilege of the floor must be strictly adhered to. Children of Members will not be permitted on the floor, and the cooperation of all Members is requested. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that when the House adjourns today, it adjourn to meet at noon on Wednesday, January 26, 1994.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri? There is no objection. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that it be in order tomorrow, Wednesday, January 26, 1994, for the Speaker to entertain a motion to suspend the rules and adopt House Resolution 323, relating to the treatment of Hugo Princz, a United States citizen, by the Federal Republic of Germany.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri? There was no objection. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that the business in order under the Calendar Wednesday rule be dispensed with on Wednesday, January 26, 1994.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentleman from Missouri? There was no objection. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT and he says  Speaker, I offer a privileged concurrent resolution (H.Con.Res. 198) and ask for its immediate consideration. The Clerk read the concurrent resolution, as follows: H. Con. Res. 198 Resolved by the House of Representatives (the Senate concurring), That when the House adjourns on Wednesday, January 26, 1994, it stand adjourned until noon on Tuesday, February 1, 1994. The concurrent resolution was agreed to. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair desires to announce that pursuant to clause 4 of rule 1, the Speaker pro tempore signed the following enrolled bill on Monday, November 29, 1993: H.R. 1025. To provide for a waiting period before the purchase of a handgun, and for the establishment of a national instant criminal background check system to be contacted by firearms dealers before the transfer of any firearm. And the Speaker signed the following enrolled bills and joint resolutions on Wednesday, December 1, 1993: H.R. 486. To provide for the addition of the Truman farm home to the Harry S. Truman national historic site in the State of Missouri. H.R. 1237. To establish procedures for national criminal background checks for child care providers. H.R. 1944. To provide for additional development at war in the Pacific National Historical Park, and for other purposes. H.R. 2150. To authorize appropriations for fiscal year 1994 for the United States Coast Guard, and for other purposes. H.R. 2535. To amend title 38, United States Code, to provide additional authority for the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide health care for veterans of the Persian Gulf War. H.R. 2840. To amend title 17, United States Code, to establish copyright arbitration royalty panels to replace the copyright royalty tribunal, and for other purposes. H.R. 3000. For reform in emerging new democracies and support and health for improved partnership with Russia, Ukraine, and other New Independent States of the former Soviet Union. H.R. 3216. To amend the comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 to control the diversion of certain chemicals used in the illicit production of controlled substances such as methcathinone and methamphetamine, and for other purposes. H.R. 3321. To provide increased flexibility to States in carrying out the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. H.R. 3450. To implement the North American Free Trade Agreement. H.R. 3514. To clarify the regulatory oversight exercised by the Rural Electrification Administration with respect to certain electric borrowers. H.R. 3616. To require the Secretary of the Treasury to mint coins in commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the birth of Thomas Jefferson, Americans who have been prisoners of war, the Vietnam veterans memorial on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the memorial, and the women in military service for America memorial, and for other purposes. H.J. Res. 272. Designating December 15, 1993, as ``National Firefighters Day''. H.J. Res. 300. Providing for the convening of the second session of the One Hundred Third Congress. S. 422. To extend and revise rulemaking authority with respect to Government securities under the Federal securities laws, and for other purposes. S. 644. Making a technical amendment of the Clayton Act. S. 994. To authorize the reestablishment of a fresh cut flowers and fresh cut greens promotion and consumer information program for the benefit of the floricultural industry and other persons, and for other purposes. S. 1507. To make certain technical and conforming amendments to the Higher Education Act of 1965. S. 1732. To extend arbitration under the provisions of chapter 44 of title 28, United States Code, and for other purposes. S. 1764. To provide for the extension of certain authority for the marshal of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court police. S. 1769. To make a technical correction, and for other purposes. S. 1777. To extend the suspended implementation of certain requirements of the Food Stamp Program on Indian reservations, to suspend certain eligibility requirements for the participation of retail food stores in the Food Stamp Program, and for other purposes. S.J. Res. 154. Designating January 16, 1994, as ``Religious Freedom Day''. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Honorable Bob Michel, Republican leader: U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, DC., November 24, 1993. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker of the House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: Pursuant to Section 403(a)(3) of Public Law 100-533, I hereby appoint the following individual to serve as a member on the National Women's Business Council: Marilu Meyer of Chicago, Illinois. Sincerely, Bob Michel, Republican Leader. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Honorable Frank Pallone, Jr., Member of Congress: December 4, 1993. Hon. Thomas S. Foley,, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that I have been served with a subpoena by the Superior Court of New Jersey in connection with a civil case. After consultation with the General Counsel, I will determine if compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Frank Pallone, Jr., Member of Congress. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from Leonard P. Wishart III, Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services: House of Representatives, Washington, DC, November 23, 1993. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker, House of Representatives, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that the Office of Finance has been served with a subpoena issued by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. After consultation with the General Counsel to the House, I have determined that compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Leonard P. Wishart III, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from Leonard P. Wishart III, Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services: House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 4, 1994. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker, House of Representatives, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that a member of the staff of the Office of Finance has been served with a subpoena issued by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. After consultation with the General Counsel, I have determined that compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Leonard P. Wishart III, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from Leonard P. Wishart III, Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services: House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 4, 1994. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker, House of Representatives, U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that my office has been served with a subpoena for employment and salary records of a House employee. The subpoena was issued by the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois in connection with a civil case on a personal injury claim. After consultation with the General Counsel, I have determined that compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Leonard P. Wishart III, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from Leonard P. Wishart III, Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services: House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 6, 1994. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that the Office of Finance has been served with a subpoena issued by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. After consultation with the General Counsel to the House, I have determined that compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Leonard P. Wishart III, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from Leonard P. Wishart III, Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services: House of Representatives, Washington, DC, January 12, 1994. Hon. Thomas S. Foley, Speaker, House of Representatives, Washington, DC. Dear Speaker: This is to formally notify you pursuant to Rule L (50) of the Rules of the House that the Office of Finance has been served with a subpoena issued by the Circuit Court for the State of Maryland. After consultation with the General Counsel to the House, I have determined that compliance with the subpoena is consistent with the privileges and precedents of the House. Sincerely, Leonard P. Wishart III, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is ZELIFF and he says  asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is ZELIFF and he says  Speaker, tonight the President will give the State of the Union Message. The American people have learned that it is not what the President says tonight but what he does afterward to follow up that counts. I am sure we will hear wonderful words emphasizing how tough the President will be on crime, how concerned he is about health care, and how he wants to reform the welfare system. We must, however, not focus on the President's words, but we must focus on the results. The facts are that the President has not filed a welfare bill. There are no specifics, and the welfare bill will not be funded in this coming budget message. When it comes to being tough on crime, we must see if the President can deliver the liberals in this House to support his rhetoric. The facts are that the President has not filed a crime bill either, and it will be interesting to see how much money is committed in his budget to fight not only welfare but crime. Finally, when it comes to health care, I predict that the President, in his budget, will not fully fund his own program. That is why he is pushing for health care to be funded off-budget, fiscally irresponsible in my judgment. Words are nice, Speaker, but it is actions that count. Welfare, crime, health care, the devil is in the details; we need to hold the President's feet to the fire and hold him accountable for the results. ____________________
 
The speaker is NORTON and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
 
The speaker is NORTON and he says  Speaker, I want to welcome back all of our colleagues to Washington, DC, my hometown, and, for all practical purposes until the end of this session, yours. As you found when you went home, residence is not all we have in common; fear and spread of crime have eclipsed other issues with 9 out of 10 Americans feeling it is worse than it was a year ago. There is, thus, a clearer kinship across all party and district boundaries on this issue that has needlessly polarized us. The floor of the House has been a place to chastise this city as if crime were patented and put in a bottle labeled ``District of Columbia.'' But, Speaker, the national crime genie has long been out of the bottle. Back home you discovered new magazine titles like ``Rural Crime Alert'' and new-found watch programs like Cities Neighborhood Watch groups. The crime menace has shown its brutal side well beyond this city's borders. Let our show of force be a balanced crime bill that catches crime both coming and going. ____________________
 
The speaker is HORN and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is HORN and he says  Speaker, tonight when the President gives his State of the Union address, you can expect that he will put a positive spin on his first year in office. But let us not kid ourselves; the President's first year in office has not been all rosy, especially for the middle class. Here is a quick review: His promise to give the middle class a tax cut was quickly abandoned. His economic package is a rerun of taxes and spending. Too many of his foreign policy initiatives have been an unmitigated disaster. His welfare reform plan is nonexistent. Indeed, the whereabouts of his crime plan is a mystery which even Sherlock Holmes could not solve. His health care reform bill is the wrong prescription for the wrong diagnosis. The President is very good at adding a spoonful of sugar and making lemonade out of old lemons. But his first year in office has been full of lemons for the middle-class taxpayer--and even his lemonade--despite its sugary rhetoric--is a bitter thing for the taxpayers to swallow. ____________________
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  Speaker, the reason for so much partisan bellyaching on the other side is simple: President Clinton's approval rating is a healthy 60 percent because the public believes he is trying to address the Nation's problems. And the reason why the perception of the Congress is at an all-time low is because the public thinks that all we do is fight and fail to get things done. And if we want to be re-elected, we won't need term limits if we continue this bickering. Do we go first on health care, or crime, or welfare reform? Who cares as long as we get the job done? We are ready to pass a significant crime bill soon with tough sentencing and prevention. Let us put that on a fast track and let us get a good start on welfare reform. But let us be realistic and recognize that a good health care plan should be our top goal this year. If we do our job right on health care reform, we will be rewarded at the polls. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Speaker and Members of the House, as the American people prepare to watch the State of the Union Address this evening, we ought to warn them of gifts bearing leaks. Many, many people view the health care proposal of the President as a gigantic gift, yet more and more is being leaked out about how that really affects the American people. Who will pay for it? How will it be paid? What new massive taxes will have to be proposed? Will there be a retention of the private doctor/ patient relationship? Will there be rationing of health care? Will hospitals be able to perform the surgical remedies that are required? What in the world will this gift really bear for the American people? Some will view the crime proposal as a gift to the American people, the gift of security. Yet if history repeats itself, the President's colleagues and the important committees in the House and in the Senate will wreak havoc with any crime bill and tilt the whole thing toward the criminal. We have been trying for a generation to be tougher on criminals, yet our opponents on the other side of the aisle make it easier for criminals. What kind of a gift of security would that be? ____________________
 
The speaker is FROST and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is FROST and he says  Speaker, 1 year ago, the word out of Dallas-Fort Worth was ``The Boyz are Back.'' After Sunday's victory over the San Francisco 49'ers, we know that the Cowboys are ``Here to Stay.'' In recent years, Super Bowl champions have come and gone. In fact, many teams have struggled to even make the playoffs the year after they win the Super Bowl. With a tougher schedule, injuries and complacency to overcome, defending champions have often folded. However, the Dallas Cowboys showed what they were made of this season. They overcame all of these obstacles and more to return to the Super Bowl and defend their title. At the beginning of the season, with Emmitt Smith out because of a contract dispute, the team was 0-2 and sports writers across the country were having a field day with the demise of yet another defending champion. Undaunted by the challenge and with Emmitt Smith back in the lineup, the Cowboys quickly sent notice to the rest of the league that they were not going to fold by winning 7 straight games and 14 of their next 16. They accomplished this despite injuries to Pro-Bowlers Troy Aikman, Emmitt Smith, Mark Stepnoski, and Ken Norton. The Cowboys have shown the character of a true champion this season and we in the Dallas-Fort Worth area are very proud to call them ``Our Team.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is FOWLER and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
 
The speaker is FOWLER and he says  Speaker, on November 30, 1993, Jacksonville, FL, was declared the final winner in the hotly contested race to become a National Football League expansion city. Due to the heroic efforts of ``Touchdown Jacksonville,'' Wayne Weaver, Tom Petway, and the entire community, Jacksonville--against great odds--broke away from the competition and crossed the finish line victorious. In choosing our city, the NFL officially recognized northeast Florida as part of a vital and expanding area, with a promising future. They also recognized the appetite for football in the home of the Gatorbowl, and their faith was not misplaced. Jaguars ticket sales took off like a rocket, leading to sellout status within 40 days of the announcement-- with 70,000 tickets sold for each of the next 3 years. I am proud of our city, and I have no doubt that our new team will mirror the determination and enthusiasm of their fans. I am also confident that their opponents will soon learn what those of us in northeast Florida already know--the Jaguars are on the prowl. ____________________
 
The speaker is RAMSTAD and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is RAMSTAD and he says  Speaker, my constituents last week gave me a clear message to pass on to all of you. At three town meetings during the week temperatures plunged to 35 degrees below zero, over 250 people turned out to express their concerns. They want us to take off our Republican hats, take off our Democrat hats, roll up our sleeves, and work together in a pragmatic, bipartisan way to pass a crime bill and reform health care and welfare. The message they sent is clear. They want less rhetoric and more serious action from the Clinton administration and Congress. They want action now on a comprehensive anticrime bill. My suburban district in Minnesota has had 12 murders since last July. My constituents want more cops, tough measures against violent offenders, more prisons to ensure that violent offenders serve their full sentences, and better drug treatment and prevention programs. They want action now to reform our broken welfare system. They're tired of spending billions on a system that breeds dependency and hopelessness. They want action now to reduce health care costs without destroying the best health care system in the world. My constituents know that the Clinton plan is a bureaucratic monster that will restrict consumer choice, kill jobs, and add to our massive budget deficit. Speaker, let us listen to our constituents. Let us do it now--and do it right. {time} 1440 ____________________
 
The speaker is BALLENGER and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute.)
 
The speaker is BALLENGER and he says  Speaker, one of the principle reasons the President has said we need health care reform is because of its effects on the deficit. But the Clinton health plan will have an explosive effect on our deficit. According to a Joint Economic Committee study, the annual Federal deficit will increase by $426 billion per year by the year 2000. This is like fighting fire with gasoline. Speaker, there are some problems with our health care system. But the Clinton Government-run health plan will not cure those problems. Hiring more bureaucrats, building more Government structures, creating more Government positions, will not improve our health care delivery system. And increasing our deficit by $426 billion a year will not solve our budget crisis. I urge my colleagues to think twice about the Clinton health care reform plan. Fighting fire with gasoline will never put out the fire. ____________________
 
The speaker is WOLF and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is WOLF and he says  Speaker, during the just completed winter session break, I made my third trip to the former Yugoslavia, this time visiting the war-ravaged city under siege, Mostar, located in southern Bosnia about 50 miles from the Croatian border. Each time I go there I come away thinking that things can get no worse. But they can and they have. Senseless killing and inhumane acts are the order of the day. The weekend report from Sarajevo in the Washington Post detailing the senseless mortaring, killing, and maiming of little kids out for a sleigh ride isn't, unfortunately, a low point in this end-of-the-century holocaust, it's business as usual. Mostar was little different. Divided by the Neretva River, east Mostar is home mostly to Bosnian Moslems while Bosnian Croatians hold the western half of the city. Serb gunners inhabit the hills and ridges to the east where artillery and mortars rain down on the city. East and West Mostar trade artillery, cannon, and sniper fire. As a result, the city resembles a bombed-out town from a World War II movie. The buildings remaining standing are largely shells and the people have moved underground, living in unheated, unlighted, and certainly unventilated cellars, seeking whatever safety from the shelling they can. There are mostly women, children, and the elderly there. Younger men are in the army there and elsewhere. Fighting. Conditions are awful. Just awful. Only untreated riverwater to drink and that has to be gotten under cover of darkness. Virtually no diesel oil for heating or even generating electrical power at the converted and mostly shelled-out hospital. Operations by candlelight, 1,000 surgeries since this nightmare began on May 9, 1993. Can't stay in the hospital to recover. Need the all-too-few beds for the next batch of shelling victims which will surely follow. At a time when the Holocaust Museum at 14th and Independence Avenue here in town attracts millions trying to understand how this tragedy of World War II could have happened and when the movie ``Schendler's List'' is so popular dealing with this nightmare, how can we sit idly by and watch a 1990's rerun of the same tragedy. Years ago, there was a woman named Kitty Genovese who was brutally attacked in the streets of New York City. Many passers-by heard her screams but no one came to her aid or even called the police. She died as a result of the attack. Bosnia today, is an international Kitty Genovese case and the nations of the world are listening to the screams and doing little to help. We, and other free nations, must now engage and somehow bring this terrorism to a halt. ____________________
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  Speaker, as the Congress begins the new session it is disturbing to read in the front page of the newspaper that people's opinion of the Congress is at an all-time low. The savings and loan crisis is just one of the issues that has eroded public trust and confidence in Congress. That is only one of the compelling reasons for Congress to exercise its obligation to have congressional legislative oversight hearings, and that is why congressional leaders must stop sweeping the White-water scandal under the rug. Speaker, the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs and its oversight subcommittee must hold hearings on Whitewater. After all, Madison Guarantee Savings and Loan cost the American taxpayers over $50 million. I have asked both the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs chairman and subcommittee oversight chairman to hold hearings, but to no avail. I ask them again to stop ignoring this problem, and to stop this coverup, and have Congress perform its obligations to the American people. Speaker, the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs is AWOL. It is time to find a chairman and to hold hearings to let the American people truly know what happened in Whitewater. ____________________
 
The speaker is BARCA and he says  of Wisconsin asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is BARCA and he says  of Wisconsin. Speaker and Members, today, as we kick off the second session of the 103d Congress, we all return after a fairly lengthy recess, and for me, after spending almost all the last 2 months crisscrossing my district, talking with various groups and individual constituents, I believe that, while people have appreciated the flurry of activity that came about at the end of the last session and the many bills and important measures that did pass, they are calling for more comprehensive and swift action on a wide array of very important priorities for this Nation, from welfare reform to crime control measures, to health care reform, to economic development, to making further progress on deficit reduction, and it is my hope that we can keep and continue that bipartisan spirit that we ended the last session on, to move forward with adopting this agenda with that sense of urgency that is all across Wisconsin and, I believe, the rest of the byways of this Nation which has to be brought to the Halls of Congress. So, President, we welcome you tonight. We hope to have you kick off this very vitally important session, and hopefully we can work together to achieve the people's agenda. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Rahall). The Chair will advise the gentleman from Wisconsin [Barca] that he should address the Chair in his remarks. ____________________
 
The speaker is LAZIO and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is LAZIO and he says  Speaker, our Nation's welfare programs were created to provide assistance to the truly needy. Yet, it is generally agreed that the system has gone sour and is tainted with fraud and abuse, which not only raises taxpayer costs, but undermines this basic purpose. Today, I introduced a bill to help reduce fraud and save millions of dollars in the AFDC Program. My bill calls upon the Secretary of HHS to conduct a feasibility study on the use of biometric technology as a means to validate the identities of AFDC recipients. According to recently published reports, New York State could save $46 million a year by expanding its experimental two-county finger- imaging program that has been running for 15 months and saved the State nearly $700,000. Governor Cuomo has called for the expansion of this project. Los Angeles County has been running a similar demonstration program since 1991, which is expected to save $20 million over 5 years. If the savings suggested by these examples are even in the ballpark, then we should not waste any time in moving this idea forward as an important component of welfare reform. Reducing welfare fraud will cut costs and ensure that this assistance goes to those who honestly need help, not those who cheat the system and the taxpayers. ____________________
 
The speaker is DUNCAN and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute.)
 
The speaker is DUNCAN and he says  Speaker, William Raspberry, the syndicated columnist, has written some very fine columns in the last few days about governmental policy toward religion. Raspberry said, ``It is a species of intolerance to require the religious to make a secret of their beliefs.'' In a Christmas column, he wrote this: Unfortunately the ACLU also opposes the moment of silence substitute for school prayer. Why? After all, the constitutional requirement is that the government not establish religion, not that it root out religion. Or to put it another way, our Founding Fathers came here in large part to get freedom of religion, not freedom from religion. In my home county this past spring, they would not even allow non- denominational prayers at high school graduations. In a column printed around the country today, Raspberry quotes Kevin Hasson, founder of the Beckett Fund, as saying this about the men who wrote the first amendment: They wouldn't have dreamed they were banning Christmas trees or the ability of people to pray in legislatures or to offer simple invocations at high school graduations. Raspberry asked this pointed question. Is it not just possible that anti-religious bias masquerading as religious neutrality is costing more than we have been willing to acknowledge? We need government neutrality toward religion--not government hostility toward religion. We need to reestablish freedom of religion in this Nation. ____________________
 
The speaker is SMITH and he says  of Texas asked and was given permission to address the House of 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
 
The speaker is SMITH and he says  of Texas. Speaker, before we hear the President's State of the Union Address, we should remember the last one. Last year the President promised America a middle-class tax cut. He delivered the largest tax increase in America's history. Last year the President promised an end of welfare as we know it. He delivered an end to the discussion of welfare before we knew it. Last Year the President promised health care reform. What he delivered were condom commercials. If you compare this President's words and his actions, words won time and time and time again. Tonight the President will come here again. And again he will promise, this time about crime. But the test of his performance is not in his delivery tonight, but in his delivery tomorrow. If the last year was any indication, then America will be returning to President Clinton's rice cake approach to policy: you will find yourself full when he is finished, but hungry before you are home. ____________________
 
The speaker is STEARNS and he says  asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks:)
 
The speaker is STEARNS and he says  Speaker, we prepare to begin the second session of the 103d Congress, we, in this House, should commit ourselves to passing legislation to attack the plague of crime afflicting this Nation and fundamentally reform our welfare system. Failure to address these key issues will undermine any efforts we undertake to strengthen our economy or address our social problems. A system that allows criminals to ply their trade in our cities, or lets individuals live better on welfare than work, destroys any message we can send on values or opportunity. For many years, well-intentioned men and women in this House have opposed welfare reform and tougher crime laws because they believed we must address the so-called root causes of poverty first. Well, today, I think it is clear that the failures of the criminal justice and welfare systems are some of the greatest root causes of poverty in America today. The material welfare of the average poor American is better than an average American knew 30 years ago. Yet their quality of life, and more generally all our lives, are worse, because of crime and the disintegration of the family. The time has come to address these issues. ____________________
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that previous to any other special order entered into, Gingrich of Georgia may be permitted to address the House for 60 minutes every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of 1994, the second session of the 103d Congress. Further, I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from New York [Solomon] be permitted a 60-minute special order for every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday of 1994, the second session of the 103d Congress.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Rahall). Without objection, so ordered. There was no objection.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Further, Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that today following legislative business and any special orders heretofore entered into, the following Members may be permitted, to address the House, revise and extend their remarks, and include therein extraneous material: Bentley, every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday in January and February for 60 minutes each; Boehner, in February, on the 1st, 3d, 8th, 9th, 22d, and 23d; in March, on the 1st, 2d, 8th, 9th, 15th, 16th, 22d, and 23d; in April, on the 12th, 13th, 19th, 20th, 26th, and 27th; in May, on the 3d, 4th, 10th, 11th, 17th, 18th, 24th, and 25th; in June, on the 8th, 14th, 15th, 21st, 22d, 28th, and 29th; in July, on the 12th, 13th, 19th, 20th, 26th, and 27th; in August, on the 2d, 3d, 9th, and 10th; in September, on the 7th, 13th, 14th, 20th, 21st, 27th, and 28th; and in October, on the 4th and the 5th, for 60 minutes each. Speaker, we might note that he skipped my birthday on all of these days. McInnis, every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday of 1994, for 60 minutes each; Talent, on February 7th, 8th, and 9th, for 60 minutes each; Kolbe, on February 1st, 8th, and 22d; and in March, on the 1st, 8th, 15th, and 22d, for 60 minutes each; And Gekas today--and this is a surprise--5 minutes.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Is there objection?
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Speaker----
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The gentleman will suspend.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  I object, Speaker.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair has heard an objection to the request.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  I object to the request.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Will the gentleman from Texas please take the microphone?
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Speaker, will the gentleman yield?
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  I do not have the floor, Speaker.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair will hear the gentleman from Texas.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Speaker, I say to my friend, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that he was reading rather hurriedly. I am interested in two unanimous request consents that you put forward and whether they were as I heard. I do not object to the litany that the gentleman made in July and all that. I understood the gentleman to make an unanimous consent that the gentleman from Georgia--and I believe he used the words, ``notwithstanding any other requests''--be put ahead of any other Member requesting special orders.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Speaker, the actual language is ``unanimous consent that previous to any other special orders entered into,'' meaning, according to my interpretation, that he would be first on the list.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  That is what I objected to.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  That was already agreed to.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  It was not agreed to by me. If that was the unanimous consent request, then the Member standing from Texas objects.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Speaker, I submit that there was no objection. I asked unanimous consent, there was no objection, and I asked the Speaker to so rule.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  In that case then, the gentleman is making a needless motion. But if you were to make your motion and it had any validity and if it requires unanimous consent, then an objection is heard.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  The question is whether the gentleman's objection was timely or not.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Yes, and while you were talking, I went down and asked.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair will advise the gentleman from Texas and all Members that the first unanimous consent requests of the gentleman from Pennsylvania were granted.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  When? Before I arrived.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. That is correct.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  The gentleman never stopped reading, Speaker. There was never a question put so there would be an objection. The question was not put while I was present in the Chamber after the gentleman started reading. He went from one unanimous consent request to another. The first was on behalf of Gingrich, and he made another on behalf of Solomon. He went on to Solomon, and he named specific dates in February, March, and July, and I do not question any of those. But I object to a unanimous consent request from any Democrat or Republican who would presume himself to be put ahead of every other Member of Congress merely by making a request at this time. If I walk over here and I go through whatever is necessary to make my request to get some time here on the floor, I should be able to do that. We are elected by the same number of people.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair understands, and the Chair will make a statement. The Chair understand the concerns of the gentleman from Texas. However, the requests of the gentleman were made in three groupings, and the first two groupings were approved by unanimous consent. He was reading the third grouping when the gentleman from Texas objected.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Please note my exception, Speaker. I think the Record will reflect that there was no pause. The question should be properly put by the Speaker, ``Is there objection?'' That question was not put. Had he put it, I would have objected, and at the first opportunity when the question was put, I did object. The Record will state that, whether you agree to it or not.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair believes that he did put those questions to the House earlier on the first two requests of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, and there was no objection heard at that time.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Would the Chair refer to some document other than his memory for the purpose of seeing whether he put the question? I respectfully ask the Chair to do so. I ask the Chair to consult the keeper of the Record. The Chair did not put the question. I am going to make the same objection, whether they are Democrats or Republicans. A Member has to come to the well and make his request like everybody else.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair does state that he does recall in the second grouping asking if there was objection and stating, ``without objection,'' and then those groupings that had already been read were approved as requested by the gentleman from Pennsylvania. The Chair specifically recalls stating, ``without objection, the requests are granted.'' There was no objection heard on the floor at that time.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  The Chair is stating that he recalls that with respect to the ones specifically asked for, the ones to which I have an objection, that he put the question here on the floor?
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Yes, the gentleman is correct.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Please note my exception.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The gentleman's statement will appear in the Record.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  I want to say that in case the Chair is wrong, please note my objection, so if the Chair is incorrect and he did not put the question, then the question is back before whomever is in the chair, and at that time, if it requires unanimous consent, please note that the objection was timely noted on the Record.
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The gentleman's statement will appear in the Record. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Rahall). Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Pennsylvania [Gekas] is recognized for 5 minutes.
 
The speaker is GEKAS and he says  Speaker, I rise on this occasion to bring to the attention of the Speaker of the House, and the American people, a serious flaw in our SSI, our disability payments. The taxpayers are subsidizing, and I repeat, the taxpayers of our country are subsidizing drug addicts and alcohol abuse addicts through the SSI Program, unwittingly. We are fostering their habits and keeping them in their habits. How is this happening? It appears we have learned from those who administer the law in this field that under one of the titles of the Social Security System, a person who, as a worker is deemed to be disabled and goes on SSI because of his drug addiction, can stay on that for life and receive SSI benefits for life without any treatment, while another section of the Social Security program calls for benefits for drug addicts if they receive treatment, and treatment is made a condition of receiving the benefits of SSI. But both of them are failing. Why? Well, on the one hand, as I just explained, a drug addict can go for life receiving additional moneys from the taxpayers, and he can further his habit and remain a burden on society, never once having to seek treatment. On the other hand, another flaw has occurred. The individual on SSI, who has to have treatment as part of the conditions, avoids that treatment in several different ways. Why? Because the law calls for a representative payee to be the recipient of the moneys for that drug addict who is supposed to be getting treatment. But the recipient can be the individual's brother, his bartender, his best friend, anybody who can be named as representative payee. And what happens is that that representative payee really turns over the money to that same addict who can go without treatment again and the system. We fail in two regards there: We fail to provide treatment for the addict who really needs it; and second, we see a waste of taxpayers' money in subsidizing a habit of alcohol or addition to drugs. My proposal, which will be forthcoming before the Chamber and for which I request cosponsorship, is always follows. Perhaps we can do it through a change of regulations, but if not, through a statute that will do the following: No. 1, it will make it definitely a condition of payment of SSI benefits for drug addiction under either title, a condition of that benefit will be attendance at, and receipt of, treatment at a treatment center, No. 1. No. 2, this new set of guidelines will have it solidly stated that a representative payee no longer can be an individual designated by the drug addict or the person who is going to receive the benefits, but it will have to be some facility, some entity that offers drug treatment and gives that very same treatment that is a condition of the receipt of the benefits in the first place. In that way, we will do those two things that the law is intended to do. We will be providing treatment for those who need it so that they can get off the drug addiction in the first place and become a hard- working law-abiding citizen, while at the same time we preserve the status of the law in providing for representative's payees to be the institution that will be rendering the treatment. I hope to prepare such legislation very quickly. But in the meantime, I am going to ask the Social Security Administration to verify the loopholes that we have found and to offer suggestions on how we can quickly close them. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Texas, [Chapman] is recognized for 5 minutes.
 
The speaker is CHAPMAN and he says  Speaker, before my election to the House of Representatives in 1985, I served for two terms, 8 years, as the district attorney for the Eighth Judicial District in Texas. During that 8-year period of time, I had an up close and personal look at violent crime, who commits violent crime, and, at least in Texas, how prosecution and punishment worked. I will say that during that period of time, in fact, when I left my duties as district attorney, the Texas law at the time was that criminals who were sentenced to prison would be in all cases eligible for parole when they had served one-third of their sentence. The incredible thing was that in Texas at that same time, each of those criminals convicted and serving time in prison could get 3 days credit for each day they served. So, in effect, in 1984 and 1985 and 1986, criminals in Texas serving time in the Texas Department of Corrections would be eligible for parole when they had served one-ninth of their sentence. Now, Texas has changed that law in recent years, and under new statutes passed in my home State, now violent criminals and repeat offenders have to serve a much larger percentage of their time. {time} 1510 And guess what? The violent crime rate in Texas has dropped. Tonight President Clinton will address the Nation and will talk about his initiatives and what we can do together as a country to do something about violent crime in America. The Senate has already passed a crime bill. The House has passed provisions of an anticrime package, and our President will tonight make additional recommendations. Speaker, what I would like to suggest is that H.R. 3584, legislation that I introduced last November, might be a very positive step in the right direction to do something nationally about reducing the incidents of violent crime. This bill, the Truth-in-Sentencing Act of 1993, would reward States that are willing to pass at the State level truth in sentencing laws, would reward them with Federal resources to construct the prison space that would be necessary, if in fact those States incarcerate violent and repeat offenders for a longer period of time. My legislation would make those resources available, if the States' truth-in-sentencing laws required that convicted violent criminals and repeat offenders would serve 85 percent of their sentence. Statistics tell us that most crime is committed and prosecuted at the State and local level. In fact, whatever we may do at the Federal level, 97 percent of the prosecution in this country occurs at the State and local level. It would seem that a basic responsibility of this Congress and our Government is to try to make our homes, our schools, our communities and our streets safer for the families in America. One of the ways we can do this is use a little common sense in recognizing these statistics which have been so true for so many years, that it is violent and repeat offenders who commit the vast majority of the crimes. It should not surprise anyone that if longer prison sentences are imposed and then the convicts are required to serve them, that the crime rate will go down. In fact, a recent independent study estimated that by passage of truth-in-sentencing legislation like I have introduced, the violent crime rate could be reduced in this country by as much as 60 percent. I have asked the President and the Attorney General to look at H.R. 3584 and incorporate it in the recommendations of the administration. And I hope that my colleagues will likewise look at what we can do today, what legislation we can pass this year that will make an immediate impact on reducing crime in America. We really need the law to be and we need the reality to be that if you do a crime, you will do the time. H.R. 3584 will put that saying into practice in the real world. It not only will take the profit out of crime, but it will require repeat and violent offenders, those who just do not believe the law applies to them, that they have to follow the rules. Once and for all, it will help make our streets, our communities and our homes a safer place. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues look at H.R. 3584. I hope that we can include this in any crime legislation that passes the Congress this year. I would suggest that the best, quickest, and most effective remedy that we can impose is to keep the violent criminals in jail. If we do that, like the experiment experienced in Texas, we are going to find that crime in America will go down. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Rahall). The Chair will advise that the Chair will recognize Members for special orders until 5 o'clock today, at which time the Chair would then declare the House in recess. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentlewoman from Illinois [Collins], is recognized for 5 minutes. [
 
The speaker is COLLINS and he says  of Illinois addressed the House. Her remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Michigan [Bonior], is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is BONIOR and he says  addressed the House. His remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Georgia [Gingrich], is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is GINGRICH and he says  addressed the House. His remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Texas [Washington], is recognized for 60 minutes.
 
The speaker is WASHINGTON and he says  Speaker, as I ponder the President's possible remarks later this evening on the State of the Union, I thought it was important to discuss some things that address what I believe will be the principal subject of the President's remarks. I am happy that several of my colleagues who preceded me on the microphone today have seen fit to address some of these issues. It seems to me, and what I read in the paper suggests, that the President will deal principally with the issue of crime in America, the reform of our health care system and welfare reform. I wonder if we in the Congress have the collective courage, the strength and the statesmanship to rededicate ourselves to true reform. For true reform is what is necessary. Some of the problems that principally beset us are crime, health care and welfare reform. These are problems that concern all Americans. Any poll that is taken indicates that these are the principal issues, concerns and worries in the hearts and in the minds of the American people. As the gentleman from Texas, who immediately preceded me to the microphone, indicated, it depends on how you look at the statistics as to what they show you. The statistics recently released by the Federal Bureau of Investigation show that America's crime rate for the last 2 years actually declined by 5 percent. The last 2 years was the only period in the last 50 years in which the Congress of the United States did not pass a crime bill. So one could say that during the 2-year period when Congress did not pass a crime bill was the only time in the last 50 years when the crime rate went down. So if we really want the crime rate to go down, we need to stop the Congress from passing crime bills, because most of what they are used for is re-election of Members of Congress. Most of what the crime bills are used for is the re-election of the Members of Congress. They make wonderful commercials. They look good on your resume. They are wonderful for television, where you can show yourself slamming the bars on some prison, but you fail to tell the citizens out there who are going to vote for you how much you are costing them. Some of my friends are in favor of the ``lock them up and throw the key away'' approach. Some of my friends are in favor of assisting the States by building regional prisons. But if my friend, who immediately preceded me to the microphone, would have his way, the gentleman from Texas [Chapman], we would require the States to impose upon their court system the requirement that 85 percent of a sentence be served. We are not going to pay for it. The States are going to have to pay for it. And in these days when most of us are speaking about unfunded mandates, here is another mandate. Now, we really do need to do something about crime. But the States can do much more about crime than the Federal Government, and I do not think they need our help. What we like to help them do is to run over each other getting to a microphone so we can tell the citizens how much we have done to protect them, how much we have done about crime, so that we can get re-elected. {time} 1520 Statistics of whether crime has decreased mean absolutely nothing. As I say, in the last 2 years crime has decreased by 5 percent, according to FBI statistics, but I don't know any people who are comforted by that because they are still afraid to walk the streets in the daytime and at night. Now they are afraid to go to the shopping malls. They are afraid to ride on the public transportation systems. They are afraid to send their children to school. Yet they are being told by the FBI that the crime statistics have gone down in the last 2 years by 5 percent. I do not know any people anywhere in America who are not afraid or have an all-permeating fear of drive-by shootings and random violence, and children being caught in the crossfire of automatic and semiautomatic weapons. The increase in the sale of burglar alarms and personal defense devices will tell us that people are afraid. People want something done about crime, but they are tired of paying to have something done about crime that does not do anything about crime. They have been paying out of the nose, they have been paying out of the pocket, they have been paying out of the ears, been paying out of everywhere that they can pay for the last 50 years of Congress to come up and engage in an exercise in futility, because we are not solving the problem. If every violent criminal in America today were locked up and put in prison, we would be safe for a little while. However, because we do not do anything about the people who are 17 and 16 and 15 and 14 and 13, if we locked up everybody that was over 17 who committed a violent crime for the rest of their life, and we do nothing more than what we are doing now for the people who are 4 and 5 and 6 and 7 and 8 and 16 and 17, in 2 years or 3 years or 4 years we will be right back where we started, except we will have a whole lot more prisons built. Speaker, these prisons are not cheap. The average cost to build one cell in which two or three or four persons may be housed is $100,000. It costs us $100,000 each time we build another maximum security cell in which we can lock up these violent criminals. A lot of them need to be locked up. That is not the point of my discussion here today. In addition to that $100,000 to build this house in which we can house up to four of these individuals, we pay the princely sum of $25,000 per year for every year they are locked up for the rest of their lives. So if we take somebody who is 20, who is going to die when he is 70, we are going to spend 50 years at $25,000 keeping that person locked up in prison. They do not even have to pay for their own keep. We want to do something about crime. We are afraid. There is at least a perception that crime has gone out of control. Crime is hemorrhaging our country to the tune of $470 billion per year. We must have a response. The present response is not working. The other body has passed a crime bill in which they were able to find $22 billion to pay for prisons when just last year, in the same year when they found $22 billion to pay for prisons, they could not find $10 billion to pay for Head Start, Healthy Start, and summer jobs for some of the same people who are now incarcerated in prison. Since June 1993, the chairman, the gentleman from Michigan, John Conyers; the gentleman from Virginia, Robert Scott; the gentleman from North Carolina, Mel Watt; the gentleman from California, Xavier Becerra; the gentleman from California, Don Edwards; and I, along with many other Members of various interest groups and caucuses, organizations and groups, have been crafting and drafting a realistic, humanistic, doable approach to the problem of crime in America. In the past these crime bills have usually been simply ways of increasing various ways to execute people, limiting the constitutional rights of individuals who are charged with crimes, establishing mandatory minimum sentences that Federal judges say impose upon them a duty to act as a robot, rather than as an individual, and building more prisons. We have been good at all of those things. In the last 50 years we have built a lot more prisons, we have established a lot more mandatory minimum sentences for people to serve, we have abridged or suspended the constitutional rights of people who have engaged in criminal activity, and we have found new ways and better ways of executing other human beings. Speaker, crime, of course, in these 50 years has not decreased as a result of these various pieces of legislation, because as I noted, the only 2-year period in the last 50 years when we have not had a crime bill was the only 2-year period in the last 50 years when crime has actually gone down. What then is the purpose of the Congress passing all of these crime bills, the citizens want to know. Crime has not decreased as a result of the passage of this legislation, nor will it ever be totally eradicated as a result of legislation. I think it is time for a radically different approach to ensure that our constitutional rights are protected, to reduce recidivism in our Nation's prisons, to ensure that our Nation's schools are safe and our neighborhoods are safe, and to save a generation of mostly poor people who wallow in an endless cycle of despair, hopelessness, and pessimism. As the Members may know, Members of the House of Representatives and of the other body will take up the complex issue of crime this year. Several bills are currently on the table for consideration, most notably the Senate version of H.R. 3355, the House version of the same bill, and H.R. 3315, the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Reform Act of 1993. Anticrime policies of the past 40 years have been a series of quick, cheap fixes. New prisons were built, mandatory minimums were imposed, constitutional protections have been eroded, in the name of public safety. Meanwhile, our economic and social programs that could have quickly brought crime down have been largely ignored. We have not created new educational opportunities for our people. We have not created new jobs for our people, and as a result, we have increased and included more affordable prison space for our people. Although this bill, 3355, was introduced as the Criminal Justice Reform Act, our goal today is to enter into a scientific analysis of the solution to crime in America. How should we spend whatever money we are going to spend on crime in America? What are we going to get for the $22 billion that the other body wants to spend? What alternatives exist to spending $22 billion, and at the end of the spending of the $22 billion have more people incarcerated, and more people needing to be incarcerated? Right now 25 percent of all African-Americans in this country are under the auspices of the criminal justice system. Twenty-five percent, one in four, black males between the age of 17 and 35 are either in prison or on probation or on parole, having been to prison. That is an alarming statistic. We must look at the alternatives, because it is clear that what we have been trying for the last 50 years has not been of benefit to any of our communities. We are afraid of each other. We do not face each other on the sidewalk and on the trains. We will not look at each other on the Metro, because we do not know who is the next criminal who is going to take out an AK-47 or an Uzi and start shooting people that he does not know, just because he has a gun. In the true spirit of cooperation and comity, we are willing and sincerely desire to work with all other Members of the House of Representatives and of the other body, groups and individuals, to make into fruition the most effective piece of legislation for the reduction of crime. It recognizes if we lock all the people who are currently committing crime up, but we do not go to the neighborhoods where we can almost point, we cannot name the child by name, but we can name the neighborhoods from which they will come. We can name the streets upon which they will be raised. We can name the schools that they are going to drop out of, We can name them almost by name. They are 4, 5, and 6 years old now. Ten years from now they will be 14, 15, and 16 years old. If society does not intervene in their lives in a meaningful way in the next 10 years, they will go to prison. If society has its way, or some of society's members in this Congress have their way, they will stay in prison, perhaps for the rest of their lives. {time} 1530 And the subject of my discussion is not whether they should go to prison or whether they should stay in prison for the rest of their lives. It is whether we should have to pay for it, whether we should have to pay $100,000 to build a cell that will house up to four people, and then $25,000 per year in today's costs, Lord knows what it is going to be with the inflation rate in future years for the next 50 years to lock somebody up in prison when we could have prevented it. We can spend one-tenth of that amount per year for 10 years. We can spend 1 year's cost of incarcerating an individual at $25,000 a year and spend $2,500 a year on these children when they are 4, 5, and 6 years old, and avoid the necessity of spending $25,000 per year on them when they get 14, 15 and 16 years old. That to me, Speaker, makes a lot of sense. It makes a lot of sense to recognize that we are going to have to get at the root causes of what produces people who turn out to be criminals in our society. We know a lot of the reasons already. That is not to coddle them or excuse away their conduct. They have been engaged in antisocial behavior. Every child who grows up poor does not turn out to be a criminal. Most of them do not. We seem to have enough social scientists, enough behavioral scientists, and enough people like that to be able to go in and look and say 10 children grew up on this street in the 1960's. They were all born in this neighborhood. They were all about the same age. They played together on the playground. They went to the same elementary school together. Why is it that two of them turned to a life of crime and have committed offense, after offense, after offense? And why is it that two of them are now locked up in prison for the rest of their lives? Why is it that 1 out of 10 turn out to be a successful doctor contributing to the community? Why is it that another turns out to be a nurse or a nurse practitioner, or a janitor or a mechanic, or a person who makes a contribution to our society in one way or another? And it does not matter what they are doing. They are not commiting crimes. They are teaching other people, they are leading other people by example, they have become productive members of their community. We ought to be able to find the difference between the ones that go to prison and the ones who do not, and we need to know what those differences are, because we need to start spending our money wisely, and we need to start spending our money carefully, because the days are gone when the U.S. Government was a bottomless pit into which it could stick its hands to pull out money to pay for all of these programs. The days are gone when we are going to be able to throw money at the problem, no matter what we think the solution is, no matter whether we think the solution is going to work. Those days are gone. The taxpayers are watching the expenditures of their dollars carefully. It seems to me that we ought to give them a dollar's worth of thought for a dollar's worth of their money, and no thought has gone into these crime bills that are being circulated around here. There is nothing in there for the American who wants to worry about not only being safe today, but being safe tomorrow. These politicians would have you think that if we locked up all of the violent criminals then you can take the burglar bars off your house, and you can go in the Safeway or the convenient store late at night and not be worried about walking in in the middle of a robbery, or you can park at the ballgame and not worry about whether your car is going to be there when you get back, or you can get on the subway and not be worried about being the victim of a random AK-47 shooting, or you can stand on the street corner and talk to your friends and neighbors and not worry about being the victim of a drive-by shooting. But you know better. You know when this $22 billion is spent the Congress will be back after $22 billion more after that, and then another $50 billion more, and then $100 billion more. There is no end to how much they would make you pay to solve crime in America. But ask yourselves, and America, of the $2.6 trillion you spent on crime in the last 40 years, what have you gotten for your money? You have elected a lot of politicians who have made a lot of 30- second commercials where they get up with the red, white, and blue flag behind them and tell you how, by God, how tough they are on these criminals, and they want to lock them up and throw the key away with your money. They want to lock them up all right, with your money. What will they use for a commercial if they lock them all up and there are no more criminals? They will have something else to run on. They cannot run on communism anymore, because we do not have that bug- a-boo. Crime is the thing that they use to strike fear in your heart so that they can get reelected. Make them think, make them come to the table. Next time they have a townhall meeting and get up and tell you how they are going so much for you about solving crime, just ask them, ``Congressman, Congressman, if we spend this $22 billion on crime, can you assure me, Congressman, that crime is going to go down in America? Can you assure me, can you promise me, do you hold out any hope that that chart that keeps going up like this when we spend this $22 billion that you are going to make us spend will drop just an iota, just go down 1 percent, or one-tenth of 1 percent? Congressman, will there be less murders in America next year when we pass these new laws that you are telling us about? When we lock all of these people up in prison, Congressman, will that mean that my car will not get stolen, that I will not get carjacked, I will not be the victim of a drive-by shooting, Congressman?'' And the honest answer is no. This is not going to do any good, because we are spending a lot of the money on the back end of the factory that turns these young people out on our streets. We are not putting any money in on the front end. We know that 97 percent of the people in prison are high school dropouts. Hello. Ninety-seven percent of the people who end up in prison are high school dropouts. Now all high school dropouts do not end up in prison, but a disproportionately high number, as opposed to college graduates, or high school graduates, or trade school graduates end up in prison. Now it does not take a rocket scientist, which I am not, to figure out that there is some connection between lack of education and prison when 97 percent of the people who are in prison quit school at the seventh or eighth grade. It seem to me that if we could find a way just to go back to the sixth grade and keep youngsters in the seventh grade, the eighth grade, and the ninth grade, we would be cutting down on the number of people we have to spend $25,000 a year apiece on to go to prison. There is an alternative that needs to be made a part of the discussion, and it is the crime bill about which I spoke earlier. What does this crime bill do that other bills do not do? First, it does away with mandatory minimum sentences for crimes. This would allow for more discretion in the hands of our judges and juries to determine what is the proper sentence for the crime that was committed. Every person who commits the same crime should not receive the same sentence. We ought to be able, a judge ought to be able to look into an individual's background and say this person has not ever committed a crime before, or this person has good family support, or this person has gotten a GED and college credits while they are in prison. The recidivism rate for people who get a college education or at least 2 years of college training while they are in prison, the rate at which they go back to prison is one-tenth that for people who do not get any training while they are in prison. The rate of those individuals who receive drug counseling while they are in prison is half of what it is for people who do not receive any drug counseling when they are in prison. The bill that I am talking about also strengthens the habeas corpus guidelines for prisoners so that a person gets one fair shot, one good trial, and if they are convicted, then we give them a fair trial before we hang them. It has no new death penalties in it, because death penalties do not do any thing but stop that individual. It is a legalized way for the State to engage in murder of its citizens. It allows for one demand drug treatment for all prisoners. The crisis of drugs in our communities needs to be dealt with as a health care crisis because that is what it is. It is not a criminal justice problem, it is a health care problem. If someone needs treatment for a disease, we should be able to provide that treatment whether they are in prison or out of prison. The bill also allows for after-release counseling and guidance for ex-offenders. This provision will help those who have paid their debt to society to become better incorporated into the mainstream of society. It puts more police officers on the streets. It bans 21 types of assault weapons. It imposes a tax on ammunition. {time} 1540 It requires higher standards in order to become a gun dealer, rather than paying Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms a $25 fee and becoming magically a gun dealer. It allows for the victims of crime to be recompensed for their losses and strengthens provisions for crimes against women. It is the goal of this bill that, through hard work and working with other Members and in comity and conversation with Members of this body, both Republican and Democrat, and a combination of legislative efforts, community spirit, and individual courage and responsibility, we can significantly decrease the incidence of crime in our homes, in our neighborhoods, in our schools, in our communities, and in our wonderful country. In the end no one solution will work, no one bill is going to be a magic panacea to solving the problem of crime in America. There are no cheap, easy solutions nor quick solutions available on the horizon. But the tremendous costs of crime in our community, as stated earlier estimated by Business Week magazine to be more than $470 billion each year, demands that we not give up. Our country's great wealth surely can be harnessed in an effective way to provide the remedies that would allow people to walk the streets without fear. We need to seriously consider alternatives that prevent individuals from becoming criminals in the first place rather than to spend all of our money punishing them once they become criminals. There is no way to end that pipeline. There are more people in this country who are 2 years old than there were 15 years ago; there are more people who are 3 years old; there are more people who are 4 years old. If we do not attend to assuring that we provide the means by which we prevent these individuals from becoming criminals 10 years from now, then we are looking in the wrong place for a solution to the wrong problem. Speaker, I think that the President will also address the question of health care in America this evening when he addresses our Nation in this State of the Union Address. Health care reform is perhaps the biggest political issue of our time. Most of the public response to the idea of health-care reform is reminiscent to the way most of us feel about our doctors when they begin spouting those doctor words that they know, that jargon that only doctors learn when they go to medical school. We trust they know what they are talking about, and at the end of the day that they do no harm. What is needed in order to solve the health-care dilemma that we have in our country where 37 million of our people have no form of health care whatsoever is a wide-open, far-ranging public debate about the deeper issues of health care than just the superficial issues that we are talking about. We need to discuss our attitudes towards life and death. We need to discuss the goals of medicine in our country. We need to discuss the meaning of health. We need to discuss the concept of suffering versus the concept of survival. We need to discuss who shall live and who shall die, and who shall decide who shall live and who shall die in our country. We must discuss these issues. But they have been currently supplanted by the rather narrow quibble over policy. The parodox of our current situation does require that we discuss policy. However, unless we address such basic existential and fundamental questions as those I have raised a moment ago, we stand little chance of solving our Nation's health-care crisis. Because 25 years ago, Speaker, 7.6 percent of our gross domestic product was devoted to health, 6.8 percent to education, 9.7 percent to defense. Today defense and education consume approximately 6 percent each, and health expenditures have climbed to 14 percent and will reach 18 percent by the year 2000. Most of the policymakers here in Washington have been focusing on the deficiencies and failures of modern medicine. They claim it is either greedy pharmaceutical companies or greedy insurance companies or unnecessary procedures or bureaucratic inefficiency and paperwork or expensive technologies and so forth. These discussions have taken control of the debate, and these ideas seemingly have taken over the Clinton administration's debate over health care. The administration seems to see the solutions to our health-care crisis in terms of improving the efficiency of the system without looking at the underpinnings that identify their approach including managed care, and those are the buzzwords for their program, such as managed care, HMO's and managed competition. Implicit in these recommendations is the assumption that the elimination of waste will obviate the need for rationing health care. Most Americans know that we already ration health care. We do it on the basis of wealth. We do it on the basis of geography. We do it on the basis of circumstances beyond the control of the individual, for if a person is wealthy, then they have as much health care as they can afford in this country. If a person is poor, all too often it is necessary for them to sleep on the floors of our public and charity hospitals for days on end before they receive the rationing that we call our health-care system, health-care delivery in our system. Our groups that are opposed to the President's plan who feel the government should take the predominant role in the health care of its people argue on behalf of a different approach. People ask how nations such as England and Canada can provide health care comparable to ours for much less money. First of all, England and Canada use the single-payer payment system; that is, the government pays for everyone's health care directly, and this system is an option, though highly efficient, that has been met with tremendous opposition in this country. Speaker, medical costs will bankrupt this country if we continue on the current trajectory. There are no data to demonstrate that improved management techniques will solve the problem. Managed care and managed competition save money in the short run, although examples of other managed care, managed industry, do not inspire much confidence. The utilities are an example of a managed industry, and the airlines are another example of a managed industry. Our recent history will teach us that we should not place all of our confidence in a managed industry purely for that purpose. But the bulk of the savings achieved by the health maintenance organizations has been achieved by cutting back on expensive, unprofitable facilities such as burn centers, trauma-care centers, neonatal intensive care units, and emergency rooms and the like. HMO's conduct what amounts to a hidden form of health-care rationing, confident in the knowledge that the cities, counties, and charitable organizations and the university hospitals are still around to pick up the slack where they do not treat burns and neonatal intensive-care patients in emergency rooms. As the managers of HMO's know only too well, the surest way to contain health-care spending is to limit access to health care and to rethink our ever expanding concept of health. If we must have allocation, the process should require open discussion such as what we are doing here today and what we will be doing in the days, weeks, and months ahead. When we are rationing life itself, the decision must be subjected to public scrutiny and debate. The first step is to set limits on health care according to the principles of equity and justice for all of our people. We can no longer leave to the marketplace decisions about access to medical care. We do not want kidneys to be sold to the highest bidder. Yet we tolerate something close to that right now; when it is necessary, although disgraceful, for a patient to have to advertise for a liver on Oprah, while the governor of Pennsylvania rushes to the head of the line to receive a new heart and liver transplant, something is wrong with the way we ration health care in our country. I do not begrudge the Governor of Pennsylvania the opportunity for a heart and liver transplant. It saved his life. But there were other people on the list for heart transplants and liver transplants long before it became necessary medically or even known medically that the Governor would need such a procedure. Speaker, access then to our scarce health-care resources must be organized along some equitable lines. I do not suggest that these are easy decisions. They are never easy decisions. They force us to face our own mortality and demand that we look beyond our own sympathies and interests to look to see what is in the greater good of our country. The ethical dilemmas do not end with access to scarce service or technology. Now come the trickier questions of deciding if and when that access should end. Most Americans spend the bulk of their health-care resources in the last 3 years of their lives; most of the money that Americans spend on health care is spent in the last 3 years of their lives. How then do we make those choices? I believe that some of the goals of any fair and just health-care system are the universal access to health care for all people, the quality of assurance in the health-care delivery system, health promotion and disease prevention, education and training of a diverse body of health-care providers, and cost containment. I have arrived at these goals as a result of several townhall meetings in my district as well as interfacing with constituents who are both lay people and physicians alike, and they tell me, together with my independent research, that these are worthwhile goals, and more importantly, obtainable goals. Under the Health Security Act as proposed by the President, most people, and I underline the word ``most,'' would obtain health-care insurance through one of two entities, either a local health alliance or a corporate alliance where available. Exceptions would be made for current medical care recipients, military personnel, veterans, and Native Americans, who would continue to be covered under their existing programs. Undocumented immigrants would not be covered under any program, Speaker, and I think that is a shame. We would run the risk of not providing health care for undocumented workers by exposing ourselves to the risk of harm of diseases that they will catch and transmit for lack of medical resources being made available to them. When I was growing up, that was called penny-wise and pound-foolish. But let me get back to the President's plan. Two basic types of plans would exist: a low-cost-sharing HMO-type plan, and a high-cost combination called preferred-provider style. Employers would pay 80 percent of the premiums for full-time workers and the worker would pay the remaining 20 percent. Employers would pay a smaller percentage for the cost of part-time workers, depending on how many hours per week they actually work. Most low-income workers and the unemployed have their share of insurance premiums at least partially subsidized by the Government. Deductibles and copayments would vary depending upon the type of plan selected by the beneficiaries. HMO's would typically have a $10 copayment for doctors fees and a $5 copay for prescription drugs. Fee- for-service plans would have a 20 percent copayment for doctors fees and hospital visits as well. Fee-for-service plans would have a $200- per-person and a $400-per-family deductible. Combination plans would have a low copayment if you are treated by a preferred-provider doctor or hospital and a higher copayment if you are treated by a provider outside of the preferred network. All of the plans would cap out-of-pocket expenses at $1,500 per person and $3,000 per family per year regardless of deductibles or copayments. Another approach to solving our health care problem in this country is called the single-payer approach. The single-payer system of health care guarantees universal access to comprehensive, quality health care at a price that Americans can afford. Under a single-payer plan, health care costs for all Americans would be paid by a single public entity, like social security or Medicare. The current network of 1,500 different insurance companies, each with its own rules, each with its own set of claims forms, each with its own level of services, would be replaced by a single agency that would pay all health care costs, all of the health care services for individuals. The Government agency would not run the health care facility, the delivery facilities, but would simply replace our current inefficient system of paying for the health care that is being delivered to our citizens. The present mix of private and public doctors, other medical professionals and health care facilities would remain. The singe-payer system would merely streamline the bill-paying process and eliminate the complex and repetitive billing and duplicative system which we now have which costs consumers billions of dollars per year paying the hospital and doctor bills alone. The single-payer system would curb health care costs through a global budget and a budget discipline unattainable when you have 1,500 companies paying the bills. The single-payer system would be progressively financed through a combination of corporate and personal taxes. These taxes would replace the premium the people who have insurance now are paying in most cases, would end up being less money than they are paying in premiums, and would replace the out-of-pocket expenses that they now pay and claim back on our income tax return for individual as well as corporate health care costs, and overall, as I said earlier, the costs would go down. All health care revenues would be placed in a national health trust fund that could be used only for health care expenditures. The specific tax rate and fees would vary under the different single-payer proposals. If a single-payer system were in place, individuals would be issued a national ``health security card,'' which would be similar to a social security card that they now have. Individuals could go to the health care provider of their choice and receive treatment simply by presenting the card. Covered services would include all medically necessary procedures, as well as prescription drugs and long-term care. Under most single-payer plans, there is no copayment or deductible. The single-payer pays either directly at an annually negotiated payment structure or through negotiated annual budgets. Health care providers would be guaranteed payment, and they would no longer have to alter the treatment to fit the insurance status of their patients. The single-payer plan would be administered at the State level according to Federal standards, with the participation of consumers, businesses, and health care providers. By allowing for State administration, the health care system could be adjusted to reflect local conditions and needs. Going back to the beginning, Speaker, I said that I would support a health care system that would allow for universal access, have cost containment, that would include quality assurance in the delivery of health care services, that would promote disease prevention, that would promote health and wellness rather than illness, and which allows for a choice of doctors. The only plan that provides for all of these is the single-payer plan. That is why I am a proud cosponsor and supporter of the single-payer plan which is introduced as House Resolution 1200. A recent news report stated that over 600,000 Americans were going to Canada to get their health care. I believe that is a ringing endorsement of the single-payer approach to health care. It is impossible, however, to reform our health care system without reforming our welfare system. The President this evening, Speaker, is expected to propose a welfare reform package which the House would consider sometime this session. Both the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on Education and Labor are expected to hold hearings on the administration's plan once it is submitted to Congress. During the campaign, the candidate, William J. Clinton, said he would ``end welfare as we know it by placing a time limit on the enrollment in aid to families with dependent children,'' which is called AFDC, which now serves 1 in 7 of our Nation's children. Almost 1 in 7 of all our children are receiving aid to families with dependent children benefits. In a companion pledge, candidate Clinton said he would end poverty of children with full-time working parents by changing the Tax Code. Among other things, the reform of welfare, according to the President, would accomplish several things. It would limit AFDC payments to 2 years and within that time would empower the parents, mostly mothers, with schooling, training, and child care needed to break the cycle of dependency. {time} 1600 I wish the President godspeed and success in that endeavor. However I remind him that the same Congress that must pass the limitations upon welfare mothers receiving benefits and providing schooling and training for welfare mothers and child care has failed, just last year, to provide day care funding, to provide benefits for young teenagers so that they will have jobs in the summer of 1993. I wish the President well. A welfare reform program must provide community service work for those who can work but are without private jobs after their AFDC ends. It must provide an earned income tax credit to make up the difference between full-time earnings of a family with children and the family's poverty level income threshold. We need to decide what it takes for a family to get by on, and if a member of the family is working and they are not coming up to the minimum that we said that they ought to have to get by on; say $20,000, the Government should provide the rest, should require that individual to receive additional training and schooling, get a GED and take college credits, and, otherwise, prepare themselves for jobs. But we are going to have to find some jobs, Speaker, that are available. We are preparing people right now for jobs that do not exist in this country. Most of our lower paying, low wage jobs are going to other countries. The President says he wants to start a national deadbeat data bank and use that and other means of enforcing child support against deadbeat parents, and I commend him for that. I applaud the efforts of the President within the budget reconciliation bill to improve the status of working families in this country. The children's initiative within the Budget Act, which included the earned income tax credit, expansion of the Food Stamp Program, increased funding for family preservation and childhood immunization were real, definitive first steps toward a real investment in human needs. Currently, Speaker, it is politically popular, however, to bash people on welfare. Welfare comes in many forms. A subsidy is welfare. When we pay a cotton farmer not to plant, Speaker, we are giving him or her welfare. When we pay for the bailout of the savings and loan debacle in this country, we are providing welfare, not only for the directors and investors of the savings and loan associations that went under, but we are providing welfare for the people who put their hard- earned money into these savings and loans and lost it through the unscrupulous acts of the boards of directors. Welfare comes in many forms. It is not just for poor people. When we bailed out Chrysler Corporation 7 years ago, Speaker, that was welfare. But it is popular to bash welfare and put the face of the single, head-of-household mother on there as if she is the reason that there is a drain on the system. Several of my colleagues have gone to the step of introducing, or will introduce, bills that abolish AFDC, JOBS, the Food Stamps Program, and Job Training Partnership Act, and many other job training programs, put strict time limits on how long they can receive welfare in an era when 15 percent of our poor people are unemployed. It makes a lot of sense to take away their hope. In order to address human needs, Speaker, welfare reform must reduce the need for welfare. The reform of the Aid to Families With Dependent Children Program cannot succeed in the absence of a broader antipoverty strategy. Families are often forced to rely on welfare. I know a lot of people that had good jobs 3 years ago when they ran out of unemployment compensation because the Congress would not pass additional unemployment benefits. Some of these same Members who want to take away the welfare are the ones who would not provide unemployment benefits for these people who were out of a job. Welfare, in a majority of cases, is not a willing choice, and, where it is a willing choice, we ought to work to take it away, but the antipoverty program must include child support benefits of all children, improve unemployment insurance, universal access to health care, increased minimum wage, and a refundable child care credit. We just invest in education and training opportunities for welfare recipients. Federal funding for the job Opportunities and Basic Skills Program, or any successor programs, should be increased to expand education and training services that give participants the skills to a decent paying, steady, stable job. We must allow people to work for wages, not for welfare. Public sector employment created for people leaving the AFDC system must provide pay and benefits equal to other workers doing the same job without displacing current workers. The AFDC system should allow working parents to receive benefits and not be penalized for their own work effort. A safety net must be provided for those who wish to leave the AFDC system. Curtailing access to welfare without reducing the need for income support would only increase poverty and hurt needy families while increasing crime in our country. Finally, Speaker, the welfare system must treat people with dignity. Family cap provisions or a limit on the number of children one can have, restrictions on migration and other measure that seek to punish certain behaviors hurt needy families and do nothing to help them escape from poverty. A reformed welfare system should emphasize incentives over penalties. Speaker, we in the Congress need a powerful sense of determination to banish the ugly blemishes of crime, of a lack of adequate health care and of poverty scarring the image of America. We can, of course, try to temporize, negotiate, small, inadequate changes and prolong the timetable of justice in the hope that the narcotic of delay will dull the pain of progress. We can try, but we will certainly fail. The shape of our Nation and the world will not permit the past luxury of gradualism and procrastination any longer. Solutions to the complex conundrums of crime, health care, and welfare will not be easy. This does not signify that they are impossible. Recognizing these complexities as challenges rather than as obstacles, Speaker, we will make real progress if we freely admit that there is no magic. We will make progress if we accept the fact that 14 years of deficit spending, ignorance to human needs and politically sexy, so-called solutions cannot be canceled out in 14 minutes or 14 days, or 14 months of atonement. Neither can we allow the guilty to tailor their atonement in such a manner as to visit another 14 years of deliberate hurt upon the victims. The debate about crime, health care, and welfare is at its least common denominator a struggle for opportunities. In asking for something the low and middle class are not seeking charity. The low and middle class do not want to languish on welfare rolls any more than the next person. The low and middle class, and the poor in this country, do not want to be given a job that they do not deserve. Neither, however, do they want to be told there is no place they can be trained to handle these jobs that will be created in the future. With equal opportunity must come the practical, realistic aid which will equip people to seize these opportunities. Giving a pair of shoes to a person who has not learned to walk is not just cruel, it is criminal. With real crime, real health care, and real welfare reform, Speaker, we can begin to find the answers to neutralizing the years of neglect and hopelessness. Whole generations have been left behind as a majority of the population has advanced. Those lost generations have never learned basic social skills at a functional level, the skills of reading and writing and arithmetic, and applying for a job and exercising the rights of citizenship, including the right to vote. That is why they are walking around not caring about our society. They think they are not a part of it, Speaker. Moreover, urban and suburban and rural poverty has not only stilled lives, it has created emotional disturbances, many of which manifest themselves in antisocial actions in the streets of Houston, TX, and Washington, DC, every day. The most tragic victims are the children of those parents who struggle and fail to provide not just food, clothing and shelter, but a stable environment for our children. I, too, sing America. The America I sing has stood solidly behind the commitment to the principles of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The America that I sing is reinforced by a substantial investment in the financial and human capital needed to make her great. The America that I love, like many other of my colleagues and my family, recognize that we have paid a price for public service, some monetarily, but all of us with regard to the time that we in our families invest. We must remember the price because, when we do, Speaker, we as a Congress have the courage to dive on the grenade to live up to the challenge for our people and not just another commercial. {time} 1610 We must do the job that is necessary for all of our people. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore (Rahall). Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from New York [Solomon] is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is SOLOMON and he says  addressed the House. His remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from New York [Owens] is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is OWENS and he says  addressed the House. His remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentlewoman from Maryland [Bentley] is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is BENTLEY and he says  addressed the House. Her remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. Under a previous order of the House, the gentleman from Colorado [McInnis] is recognized for 60 minutes. [
 
The speaker is McINNIS and he says  addressed the House. His remarks will appear hereafter in the Extensions of Remarks.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  pro tempore. The Chair declares the House in recess until approximately 8:40 p.m. for the purpose of receiving in joint session the President of the United States. Accordingly (at 4 o'clock and 10 minutes p.m.), the House stood in recess until approximately 8:40 p.m. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The Chair appoints as members of the committee on the part of the House to escort the President of the United States into the Chamber: The gentleman from Missouri [Gephardt]; The gentleman from Michigan [Bonior]; The gentleman from Maryland [Hoyer]; The gentleman from California [Fazio]; The gentlewoman from Connecticut [Kennelly]; The gentleman from South Carolina [Derrick]; The gentleman from Illinois [Michel]; The gentleman from Georgia [Gingrich]; The gentleman from Texas [Armey]; The gentleman from Illinois [Hyde]; The gentleman from Arkansas [Dickey]; and The gentleman from Arkansas [Hutchinson].
 
The speaker is VICEP and he says  The President of the Senate, at the direction of that body, appoints the following Senators as members of the committee on the part of the Senate to escort the President of the United States into the House Chamber: The Senator from Maine [Mitchell]; The Senator from Kentucky [Ford]; The Senator from Arkansas [Pryor]; The Senator from Louisiana [Breaux]; The Senator from Maryland [Mikulski]; The Senator from South Dakota [Daschle]; The Senator from Florida [Graham]; The Senator from Michigan [Riegle]; The Senator from New Jersey [Lautenberg]; The Senator from Kansas [Dole]; The Senator from Wyoming [Simpson]; The Senator from Mississippi [Cochran]; The Senator from Mississippi [Lott]; The Senator from Oklahoma [Nickles]; The Senator from Texas [Gramm]; and The Senator from South Carolina [Thurmond]. The Doorkeeper announced the Ambassadors, Ministers, and Charge d'Affaires of foreign governments. The Ambassadors, Ministers, and Charge d'Affaires of foreign governments entered the Hall of the House of Representatives and took the seats reserved for them. The Doorkeeper announced the Chief Justice of the United States and the Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice of the United States and the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court entered the Hall of the House of Representatives and took the seats reserved for them in front of the Speaker's rostrum. The Doorkeeper announced the Cabinet of the President of the United States. The members of the Cabinet of the President of the United States entered the Hall of the House of Representatives and took the seats reserved for them in front of the Speaker's rostrum. At 9 o'clock and 10 minutes p.m., the Doorkeeper announced the President of the United States. The President of the United States, escorted by the committee of Senators and Representatives, entered the Hall of the House of Representatives, and stood at the Clerk's desk. [Applause, the Members rising.]
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  Members of Congress, I have the high privilege and the distinct honor of presenting to you the President of the United States. [Applause, the Members rising.] ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  The Chair declares the joint session of the two Houses now dissolved. Accordingly, at 10 o'clock p.m. and 23 minutes, the joint session of the two Houses was dissolved. The Members of the Senate retired to their Chamber. ____________________
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY and he says  Speaker, I move that the message of the President be referred to the Committee of the Whole House on the State of the Union and ordered printed. The motion was agreed to. MESSAGE FROM THE SENATE A message from the Senate by Hallen, one of its clerks, announced that the Senate had passed without amendment concurrent resolutions of the House of the following titles: H. Con. Res. 197. Concurrent resolution providing for a joint session of Congress to receive a message from the President on the State of the Union. H. Con. Res. 198. Concurrent Resolution providing for an adjournment of the House from Wednesday, January 26, 1994 to Tuesday, February 1, 1994. ____________________
 
The speaker is ROSE, and he says  from the Committee on House Administration, reported that that committee had examined and found truly enrolled bills and joint resolutions of the House of the following titles, which were thereupon signed by the Speaker: H.R. 486. An act to provide for addition of the Truman Farm Home to the Harry S Truman National Historic Site in the State of Missouri. H.R. 1025. An act to provide for a waiting period before the purchase of a handgun, and for the establishment of a national instant criminal background check system to be contacted by firearms dealers before the transfer of any firearm. H.R. 1237. An act to establish procedures for national criminal background checks for child care providers. H.R. 1944. An act to provide for additional development at War in the Pacific National Historical Park, and for other purposes. H.R. 2150. An act to authorize appropriations for fiscal year 1994 for the United States Coast Guard, and for other purposes. H.R. 2535. An act to amend title 38, United States Code, to provide additional authority for the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide health care for veterans of the Persian Gulf War. H.R. 2840. An act to amend title 17, United States Code, to establish copyright arbitration royalty panels to replace the Copyright Royalty Tribunal, and for other purposes. H.R. 3000. An act for reform in emerging new democracies and support and help for improved partnership with Russia, Ukraine, and other new independent states of the former Soviet Union. H.R. 3216. An act to amend the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 to control the diversion of certain chemicals used in the illicit production of controlled substances such as methcathinone and methamphetamine, and for other purposes. H.R. 3321. An act to provide increased flexibility to States in carrying out the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program. H.R. 3450. An act to implement the North American Free Trade Agreement. H.R. 3414. An act to clarify the regulatory oversight exercised by the Rural Electrification Administration with respect to certain electric borrowers. H.R. 3616. An act to require the Secretary of the Treasury to mint coins in commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the birth of Thomas Jefferson, Americans who have been prisoners of war, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the Memorial, and the Women in Military Service for America Memorial, and for other purposes. H.J. Res. 272. Joint resolution designating December 15, 1993, as ``National Firefighters Day''. H.J. Res. 300. Joint resolution providing for the convening of the Second Session of the One Hundred Third Congress. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  announced his signature to enrolled bills and a joint resolution of the Senate of the following titles: S. 422. An act to extend and revise rulemaking authority with respect to government securities under the Federal securities laws, and for other purposes. S. 664. An act making a technical amendment of the Clayton Act. S. 994. An act to authorize the establishment of a fresh cut flowers and fresh cut greens promotion and consumer information program for the benefit of the floricultural industry and other persons, and for other purposes. S. 1507. An act to make certain technical and conforming amendments to the Higher Education Act of 1965. S. 1732. An act to extend arbitration under the provisions of chapter 44 of title 28, United States Code, and for other purposes. S. 1764. An act to provide for the extension of certain authority for the Marshal of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court Police. S. 1769. An act to make a technical amendment and for other purposes. S. 1777. An act to extend the suspended implementation of certain requirements of the food stamp program on Indian reservations, to suspend certain eligibility requirements for the participation of retail food stores in the food stamp program, and for other purposes. S.J. Res. 154. Joint resolution designating January 16, 1994, as ``Religious Freedom Day''. ____________________
 
The speaker is HAMILTON: and he says  Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress. Final Report of the House Members of the Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress pursuant to House Concurrent Resolution 192, 102d Congress (Rept. 103-413). Pursuant to section 4 of House Concurrent Resolution 192 (102d Congress), as continued in effect through December 31, 1993, by section 317 of Public Law 102-392; referred to the Committees on Rules, House Administration, Government Operations, Education and Labor, and the Judiciary, and ordered to be printed. ____________________
 
The speaker is ANDREWS and he says  of Texas: H.R. 3721. A bill to provide grants to the Bureau of Justice Assistance to expand the capacity of correctional facilities in the States, increase programs for major offenders and parolees, and for other purposes; jointly, to the Committees on the Judiciary, Ways and Means, Foreign Affairs, Public Works and Transportation, Armed Services, Agriculture, Science, Space, and Technology, Government Operations, Energy and Commerce, Natural Resources, House Administration, Rules, Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, Veterans' Affairs, Education and Labor, and Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is BARLOW and he says  (for himself and Baesler): H.R. 3722. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for the tax-free treatment of certain education savings accounts, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By
 
The speaker is BOEHLERT: and he says  H.R. 3723. A bill to provide that the exception from the limitation on the accumulation of annual leave which currently applies to Federal employees affected by the closure of a military installation be extended to those affected by a realignment with respect to any such installation as well; to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is KENNELLY: and he says  H.R. 3724. A bill to designate the U.S. courthouse located in Bridgeport, CT, as the ``Brien McMahon Federal Building''; to the Committee on Public Works and Transportation. By
 
The speaker is KING: and he says  H.R. 3725. A bill to reduce the amounts appropriated to the Department of Education to increase grants to State and local educational agencies and to reduce the Federal budget deficit; to the Committee on Education and Labor. By
 
The speaker is KLUG and he says  (for himself, Petri, Barrett of Wisconsin, Barca of Wisconsin, Roth, Kleczka, and Gunderson): H.R. 3726. A bill to require the Secretary of Transportation to amend the existing regulations applicable to charter flights to the Super Bowl to apply the requirements of such regulations to charter flights to intercollegiate football games designated as bowl games and to the basketball games among the last four teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's division I championship basketball tournaments; to the Committee on Public Works and Transportation. By
 
The speaker is LAZIO and he says  (for himself, King, Levy, Boehlert, Lewis of California, Petri, Dornan, Bilbray, Zimmer, Walker, McHugh, Armey, Gingrich, Canady, Shaw, Dunn, Allard, DeLay, Horn, Fowler, Duncan, and Gekas): H.R. 3727. A bill to require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct a study of, and report to the Congress on, the feasibility of using biometric devices to verify the identity of persons applying for or receiving aid to families with dependent children in order to reduce fraud in the welfare program; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By
 
The speaker is NORTON and he says  (for herself, Dellums, Jefferson, Lewis of Georgia, and McDermott): H.R. 3728. A bill to eliminate the unfunded liability of the teachers', firefighters', police officers', and judges' pension funds of the District of Columbia by increasing and extending the contributions of the Federal Government to such funds, increasing employee contributions to such funds, and establishing a single annual cost-of-living adjustment for annuities paid from such funds, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the District of Columbia. By
 
The speaker is ROUKEMA: and he says  H.R. 3729. A bill to eliminate automatic pay adjustments for Members of Congress; jointly, to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service and House Administration. By
 
The speaker is SAWYER: and he says  H.R. 3730. A bill to establish a professional development program; to the Committee on Education and Labor. By
 
The speaker is BROWN and he says  of Florida: H.R. 3731. A bill to amend title 10, United States Code, to repeal the requirement that amounts paid to a member of the Armed Forces under the Special Separation Benefits Program of the Department of Defense be offset from amounts subsequently paid to that member by the Department of Veterans Affairs as disability compensation; to the Committee on Armed Services. By
 
The speaker is LaROCCO: and he says  H.R. 3732. A bill to designate certain lands in the State of Idaho as wilderness, and for other purposes; jointly, to the Committees on Natural Resources and Agriculture. By
 
The speaker is LEVY and he says  (for himself, Quinn, King, Lazio, Machtley, Bilirakis, Solomon, McCollum, Gilman, Kaptur, and Torkildsen): H.R. 3733. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to prohibit the interstate transportation of a firearm with the intent to commit a violent crime, and to impose the death penalty for a violation that results in death; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By
 
The speaker is HUGHES and he says  (for himself and Regula): H.J. Res. 304. Joint resolution designating May 1994 as ``Older Americans Month''; to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is FRANK and he says  of Massachusetts: H.J. Res. 305. Joint resolution designating April 28, 1994, as ``Exercise Tiger Day''; to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is ROTH: and he says  H.J. Res. 306. Joint resolution to designate the month of May 1994 as ``National Foster Care Month''; to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT: and he says  H. Con. Res. 197. Concurrent resolution providing for a joint session of Congress to receive a message from the President on the State of the Union; considered and agreed to. H. Con Res. 198. Concurrent resolution providing for an adjournment of the House from Wednesday, January 26, 1994, to Tuesday, February 1, 1994; considered and agreed to. By
 
The speaker is TALENT: and he says  H. Con. Res. 199. Concurrent resolution expressing the sense of the Congress that a postage stamp should be issued to honor the 100th anniversary of the Jewish War Veterans of the United States of America; to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service. By
 
The speaker is GEPHARDT: and he says  H. Res. 325. Resolution providing for a committee to notify the President of the assembly of the Congress; considered and agreed to. By
 
The speaker is WHITTEN: and he says  H. Res. 326. Resolution to inform the Senate that a quorum of the House has assembled; considered and agreed to. By
 
The speaker is MOAKLEY: and he says  H. Res. 327. Resolution providing for the hour of meeting of the House; considered and agreed to. H. Res. 328. Resolution expressing the condolences of the House on the death of Representative Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr.; considered and agreed to. By
 
The speaker is ROSE: and he says  H. Res. 329. Resolution designating 1994 as a year to honor the memory and leadership qualities of the Honorable Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr., the late Speaker of the House of Representatives; to the Committee on House Administration. By
 
The speaker is CASTLE and he says  (for himself and Emerson): H. Res. 330. Resolution to establish a special ad hoc committee to review the current welfare system and to report comprehensive welfare reform legislation; to the Committee on Rules. By
 
The speaker is STENHOLM and he says  (for himself, Smith of Oregon, Payne of Virginia, Snowe, Kennedy, Inhofe, Barton of Texas, and Kyl): H. Res. 331. Resolution providing for the consideration of the Joint Resolution (H.J. Res. 103) proposing an amendment to the Constitution to provide for a balanced budget for the U.S. Government and for greater accountability in the enactment of tax legislation; to the Committee on Rules. ____________________
 
The speaker is de and he says  Lugo, Moran, Manton, Dellums, and Kennelly. H.R. 1534: Nadler. H.R. 1552: Bartlett of Maryland, Kreidler, Upton, McInnis, and Lazio. H.R. 1595: Smith of Michigan. H.R. 1604: Lazio and Wheat. H.R. 1605: Lazio. H.R. 1620: Paxon and Kingston. H.R. 1671: Murphy, Castle, Valentine, McHale, McKinney, and Clayton. H.R. 1683: Jacobs. H.R. 1709: Clayton, Derrick, Moorhead, Sam Johnson, Pombo, Rohrabacher, Kim, Pete Geren of Texas, LaFalce, Huffington, Glickman, Klein, Holden, and Clyburn. H.R. 1797: Furse. H.R. 1799: Furse. H.R. 1897: Natcher and Filner. H.R. 1931: Peterson of Florida. H.R. 1968: Miller of California, Cooper, and Morella. H.R. 1983: Engel. H.R. 2019: Kreidler. H.R. 2032: Sanders. H.R. 2050: Wheat. H.R. 2059: Goodlatte. H.R. 2076: Margolies-Mezvinsky. H.R. 2095: Ewing. H.R. 2130: Oberstar. H.R. 2135: Fingerhut, Cramer, Sisisky, Bonior, Meehan, Diaz-Balart, Morella, Packard, Kolbe, Kopetski, and Sanders. H.R. 2145: Romero-Barcelo, Cramer, Jacobs, and Pelosi. H.R. 2153: Frank of Massachusetts, Bilbray, Coppersmith, and Nadler. H.R. 2159: Maloney. H.R. 2175: Frost and Payne of Virginia. H.R. 2227: Kaptur, Talent, McKinney, Emerson, Johnson of South Dakota, Lightfoot, and Nadler. H.R. 2241: Minge. H.R. 2292: Johnston of Florida, English of Arizona, Vento, Gallegly, Miller of Florida, McDermott, Kreidler, and Johnson of South Dakota. H.R. 2326: LaFalce, Skeen, Leach, Kingston, Blute, Parker, Inglis of South Carolina, Moorhead, Canady, Ackerman, and Quinn. H.R. 2338: Schumer. H.R. 2346: Engel. H.R. 2418: Maloney, Upton, Hefner, Smith of Michigan, and Conyers. H.R. 2420: Torres. H.R. 2434: Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 2475: Shepherd, and Pelosi. H.R. 2484: Engel, Johnston of Florida, Furse, Miller of California, Morella, and Sanders. H.R. 2488: Wheat. H.R. 2525: Coble. H.R. 2557: Stump. H.R. 2599: Pryce of Ohio, Furse, Pallone, Barca of Wisconsin, Gilman, Lloyd, DeFazio, Farr, Evans, and Sanders. H.R. 2623:
 
The speaker is de and he says  Lugo, Lewis of Georgia, Browder, Bacchus of Florida, Wilson, Hutchinson, Bryant, Zeliff, Jacobs, Swett, Richardson, Price of North Carolina, and Gilman. H.R. 2638: Farr, Olver, Sangmeister, and Brown of Ohio. H.R. 2641: Maloney, Price of North Carolina, Kleczka, Obey, McNulty, Torres, Roemer, Mollohan, Peterson of Minnesota, and Hochbrueckner. H.R. 2662: Brown of Florida and Fazio. H.R. 2663: Hinchey, Inhofe, Brown of California, Grandy, Mollohan, and Hall of Ohio. H.R. 2705: Bartlett of Marylandand Lazio. H.R. 2788: Swett and Byrne. H.R. 2803: Hoagland, Orton, Bachus of Alabama, Bartlett of Maryland, Diaz-Balart, Linder, and Upton. H.R. 2830: Menendez and Abercrombie. H.R. 2859: Sam Johnson, Kim, Duncan, Bachus of Alabama, Byrne, Sundquist, Fowler, Wolf, Gallo, and Saxton. H.R. 2860: Clinger. H.R. 2886: Condit. H.R. 2896: Weldon and Nadler. H.R. 2898: Ackerman, Frank of Massachusetts, Roybal-Allard, and Woolsey. H.R. 2912: Fingerhut, Hoekstra, McKinney, Murphy, Conyers, and Blute. H.R. 2925: Gingrich and Fingerhut. H.R. 3005: Bonilla, Bartlett of Maryland, Walsh, Inglis of South Carolina, Gingrich, Hyde, DeLay, Stenholm, Dornan, Baker of Louisiana, Hunter, McCollum, Ewing, Penny, Doolittle, Paxon, and Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 3007: Fish. H.R. 3016: Unsoeld. H.R. 3017: Stark, Moorhead, Studds, Ballenger, Gordon, Hansen, Regula, Taylor of North Carolina, and Woolsey. H.R. 3021: Packard and Manton. H.R. 3023: Sanders, Taylor of North Carolina, Johnson of Georgia, Unsoeld, McCollum, Hochbrueckner, Chapman, Schaefer, Fowler, Barlow, Jacobs, Myers of Indiana, Ortiz, Barcia of Michigan, and Stearns. H.R. 3024: Bliley. H.R. 3059: Gene Green of Texas, Blute, and LaFalce. H.R. 3078: McInnis and Inslee. H.R. 3087: Morella, Neal of North Carolina, Quillen, Goodling, Fazio, and Roukema. H.R. 3100: Nadler, Sanders, and Stark. H.R. 3102: Laughlin, Andrews of New Jersey, Gallegly, Livingston, and Sisisky. H.R. 3105: Frost and Shays. H.R. 3109: Quinn and Scott. H.R. 3121: Darden and Oberstar. H.R. 3122: Sanders. H.R. 3129: Johnston of Florida. H.R. 3146: Doolittle, Baker of California, and Kim. H.R. 3173: Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 3233: Laughlin, Pete Geren of Texas, Darden, and Ravenel. H.R. 3271: Manton. H.R. 3288: Machtley, Pryce of Ohio, Quinn, and Shays. H.R. 3293: Schenk, Unsoeld, Gallo, Lancaster, Houghton, Pete Geren of Texas, Shaw, Diaz-Balart, Coleman, Snowe, and Stupak. H.R. 3303: Klein, Kreidler, Nadler, and Smith of New Jersey. H.R. 3328: Gillmor, Lewis of California, Barrett of Wisconsin, Sangmeister, Taylor of North Carolina, Goodling. Stenholm, Brown of California, Kim, Stark, and Allard. H.R. 3334: Packard. H.R. 3364: Sanders. H.R. 3365: Nadler and Richardson. H.R. 3366: Frank of Massachusetts and Smith of New Jersey. H.R. 3367: Gingrich and Walsh. H.R. 3373: Smith of New Jersey. H.R. 3374: Smith of New Jersey. H.R. 3392: Taylor of Mississippi, Skeen, Bartlett of Maryland, Doolittle, Stump, Kim, Cox, Dreier, Young of Alaska, McCollum, Hutto, Minge, Smith of Texas, Laughlin, Wilson, Regula, Solomon, Everett, Spence, LaRocco, Petri, Poshard, Lewis of California, Levy, Smith of Michigan, Allard, Duncan, Mica, Coble, McInnis, and Sisisky. H.R. 3394: Goss, Nussle, Fawell, and Meyers of Kansas. H.R. 3421: Bartlett of Maryland, Inglis, of South Carolina, Walsh, Gingrich, Hyde, DeLay, Stenholm, Dornan, Baker of Louisiana, Hunter, McCollum, Ewing, Penny, Doolittle, Paxon, and Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 3424: Dooley, Gingrich, Schenk, Brown of Ohio, Sisisky, Kreidler, Tanner, Zimmer, Wheat, and Machtley. H.R. 3434: Gene Green of Texas, Olver, Sanders, and Velazquez. H.R. 3457: Baker of Louisiana, Brown of Ohio, and Goss. H.R. 3472: Sanders. H.R. 3490: Chapman, Hamilton, Kopetski, Lloyd, Roberts, Thurman, Walsh, Wilson, and Wolf. H.R. 3527: Gutierrez, Cardin, Lowey, Byrne, Hefner, Moran, Wheat, Mazzoli, Schenk, Beilenson, Stark, Frank of Massachusetts, Harman, Owens, Vento, Castle, Pelosi, and Fingerhut. H.R. 3534: Filner and Sanders. H.R. 3542: Moran. H.R. 3546: Saxton, Cramer, Danner, Bunning, Rowland, Everett, Shays, Burton of Indiana, Hamilton, Gallo, Kingston, Zeliff, Kyl, Hoekstra, Roemer, Wolf, Morella, Bartlett of Maryland, Linder, Hilliard, Hutchinson, Kaptur, Lambert, Montgomery, Darden, and Crapo. H.R. 3556: Quinn. H.R. 3569: Lipinski, Gonzalez, Frost, and Washington. H.R. 3572: Stokes. H.R. 3587: Bereuter. H.R. 3614: Olver. H.R. 3633: Portman, Fawell, McHugh, Shays, Baker of Louisiana, Goss, and Grams. H.R. 3645: Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 3650: Studds, Slaughter, and Ford of Michigan. H.R. 3658: Boucher, Cox, Condit, and Packard. H.R. 3663: Ford of Tennessee, Norton, Kopetski, and Diaz-Balart. H.R. 3666: Kasich and Wolf. H.R. 3687: Wheat, Mann, Ballenger, and Reed. H.R. 3695: Doolittle, Inglis of South Carolina, Gingrich, Hyde, Baker of Louisiana, Hunter, McCollum, Ewing, Penny, and Taylor of North Carolina. H.R. 3698: Goss and Cramer. H.R. 3705: Young of Florida and Mazzoli. H.R. 3720: Ackerman, Foglietta, Jefferson, Lowey, Lipinski, Miller of California, and Wheat. H.J. Res. 90: Manton and Lewis of Georgia. H.J. Res. 113: Canady and Duncan. H.J. Res. 122: Fazio, Byrne, Cramer, Bartlett of Maryland, Ackerman, Lewis of Florida, and Gordon. H.J. Res. 129: Roukema. H.J. Res. 131: Fazio, Shaw, and Coyne. H.J. Res. 231: Bliley, Clay, Mazzoli, Valentine, Callahan, Roberts, Jacobs, Bevill, Oxley, Shays, Kasich, Wolf, and Ballenger. H.J. Res. 246: Andrews of New Jersey, Barcia of Michigan, Burton of Indiana, Coble, Crane, Dornan, Duncan, Hamilton, Hayes, Houghton, Hutto, Inhofe, Lewis of Georgia, Skelton, Taylor of North Carolina, Unsoeld, Waters, Barca of Wisconsin, Danner, Dicks, Edwards of Texas, Flake, Gallegly, Gingrich, Hefner, Hoke, Horn, Stenholm, Brown of Florida, Furse, Klink, Michel, Pryce of Ohio, Taylor of Mississippi, Washington, and Young of Florida. H.J. Res. 253: Cantwell and Dunn. H.J. Res. 278: Brewster, Greenwood, Mazzoli, Dellums, Ramstad, Goodling, Murtha, Jefferson, Cramer, Kreidler, McNulty, Manton, Coleman, Conyers, Gordon, Slattery, Kasich, and Payne of New Jersey. H.J. Res. 291: Hefner, Leach, Valentine, Sundquist, Pomeroy, Johnson of South Dakota, Greenwood, Kopetski, and Bonior. H.J. Res. 293: Underwood, Lipinski, Frost, and Kopetski. H. Con. Res. 15: Lewis of Georgia. H. Con. Res. 103: Andrews of Maine. H. Con. Res. 110: Torricelli, Fingerhut, Lantos, Hutchinson, McCollum, Dickey, and Swett. H. Con. Res. 122: Huffington, Ford of Michigan, Shaw, Bonior, Andrews of Texas, Zeliff, Fawell, Archer, and Talent. H. Con. Res. 124: Solomon, Neal of North Carolina, Miller of California, Durbin, Snowe, and Wolf. H. Con. Res. 141: Cunningham. H. Con. Res. 148: Horn, Ewing, and Rohrabacher. H. Con. Res. 176: Martinez, Slattery, Hall of Texas, Velazquez, Bacchus of Florida, Cox, Cramer, Rowland, Johnson of Georgia, Gene Green of Texas, Hinchey, Edwards of Texas, Romero- Barcelo, Brewster, Scott, Bishop, Hughes, Miller of Florida, Filner, Furse, Byrne, Synar, Manton, Deutsch, Rahall, Lewis of California, Frost, Leach, Hutchinson, Moorhead, Becerra, Wise, Wheat, Fawell, Taylor of North Carolina, Volkmer, and Meyers of Kansas. H. Con. Res. 186: Lowey. H. Con. Res. 195: Quinn. H. Res. 38: Eshoo, Tucker, Washington, and Nadler. H. Res. 156: Torkildsen. H. Res. 202: Engel and Fowler. H. Res. 234: Lambert, Quinn, Tanner, Pete Geren of Texas, Meyers of Kansas, Bishop, Hoke, Blute, Collins of Georgia, Costello, Kennelly, Myers of Indiana, Rowland, Payne of New Jersey, Sam Johnson, Hastert, Saxton, Ros-Lehtinen, Studds, Moorhead, Andrews of Maine, Crane, Walker, Velazquez, Peterson of Florida, McMillan, Goodlatte, Coyne, Jacobs, Sundquist, Bachus of Alabama, Miller of Florida, Dornan, Sisisky, Doolittle, Jefferson, Lehman, and Coppersmith. H. Res. 236: Browder, Ravenel, Livingston, Fields of Texas, McKinney, Young of Florida, Bevill, Edwards of Texas, Barrett of Wisconsin, Ewing, Bacchus of Florida, Hastert, Shaw, Franks of New Jersey, Lewis of Georgia, Crane, Fazio, Taylor of Mississippi, Young of Alaska, Manton, Bartlett of Maryland, Lewis of Florida, Everett, McCrery, Baesler, Morella, Price of North Carolina, Quinn, Meyers of Kansas, Frost, Slaughter, Duncan, and Porter. H. Res. 281: Long, Allard, Morella, Smith of Michigan, Diaz-Balart, Kaptur, Andrews of New Jersey, Costello, Shuster, Snowe, Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas, Clinger, LaFalce, Wilson, Goodling, Hochbrueckner, Hayes, Derrick, Kleczka, Rowland, Ehlers, and Slattery. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPEAKER and he says  presented a petition of the Governor of Puerto Rico, relative to a copy of the preliminary certification of the vote count, issued by the Puerto Rico State Elections Commission; to the Committee on Natural Resources.
 
S





The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The majority leader is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, under a previous order, there was to be at this time a vote on a motion to instruct. I now ask unanimous consent that I and then the Republican leader be recognized for the purpose of making brief opening statements and that upon the completion of the Republican leader's remarks, the Senate proceed to vote on the motion to instruct.
 
The speaker is JOHNSTON and he says  President, reserving the right to object, will the majority leader tell me how long that will last?
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  I anticipate our remarks in total should be no more than 15 minutes or so. I apologize for any inconvenience to Senators by virtue of this change. It is to accommodate other Senators.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Is there objection? Hearing no objection, the request is granted. The majority leader is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, today marks the beginning of the 2d session of the 103d Congress. The agenda before us is ambitious. But the workload that needs attention is large. We should be prepared to act promptly on disaster relief aid for southern California. The enormous damage inflicted by the earthquake has disrupted the life of one of the Nation's great cities and threatens economic revival in the region. Our economy has also been dealt a short but sharp blow by the recordbreaking freeze that immobilized much of the Midwest and East this month. Conditions abroad require our attention and action. Reform in Russia, the removal of nuclear weapons from Ukraine and ratification of START II are all important to the ultimate security of the Nation, and we cannot allow ourselves to be distracted from them. President Clinton's successful trip to Europe and Russia laid a basis on which we must be prepared to act. The world has changed, and even though our principal work is here at home, we cannot afford to ignore those changes and what they mean for us. I spent a good deal of the recess traveling in my State, talking to Maine's citizens about their hopes and fears for the new year. Their concerns--job security, economic growth, health care, crime, education, the environment--all are reflected in this year's legislative agenda. The hopes and dreams my constituents shared with me are not unreachable or unreasonable. They want to earn a decent living and enjoy a measure of job security. They want to feel safe on their own city streets. They want neighborhoods safe enough to play in and schools where children can learn without fear. They want the security of knowing that if a family member needs health care, it will be there. These are minimal needs in a civilized society. The Congress has a role in addressing those concerns. I am determined we will do so this year. Last session, we took the first steps to rebuild the economy and put the deficit on a downward path. There is evidence that the $500 billion deficit reduction package we approved last August is working. Before we acted, the deficit forecast for 1995 was in the range of $300 billion. Today, with the budget plan in place, giving us stronger growth, lower inflation, and low interest rates, the deficit forecast has been credibly cut by more than $100 billion, to an anticipated $180 billion. That is a huge saving in borrowing costs that have hindered economic growth for too many years. Interest rates are the lowest in a generation, with mortgage rates averaging under 7 percent. Low rates have allowed million of Americans to buy homes--I note that the purchase of homes, existing homes, set a record in 1993, the highest ever in our Nation's history--and given millions of others more disposable income from refinancing their mortgages at lower rates. Retailers enjoyed a solid holiday season. Economists predict that fourth-quarter economic performance could be as high as 6 percent, the best in a very long time. Overall 1993 economic growth was in the range of 3 percent, the strongest showing in the Western industrialized world. Housing starts are at their highest level in 4 years. Consumer price inflation ran at 2.7 percent last year, the lowest since the collapse of world oil prices in 1986, and the first time in more than 30 years that inflation was below 3 percent for 2 consecutive years. After 4 years of virtually no growth, the rate of job creation in the last 12 months has been impressive. Almost 2 million new jobs were created last year. Unemployment, which was at 7.3 percent a year ago, is now at 6.4 percent. That is still too high, but the underlying direction downward is sound. Productivity has risen, which means American workers are again laying the groundwork for higher living standards. Most important, a year of solid economic growth and strong job creation has reversed public attitudes. Americans are more confident of their economy and of themselves. Consumer confidence is up and the economy is beginning a strong recovery. These are all positive signs, but they do not mean our work is done. We have to continue to focus on balancing the services Americans expect with a declining deficit. That is needed to keep the economy robust. We must continue to look for ways Government can do what people demand more efficiently and more productively. The productivity gain that is already showing up reflects the effects of investment in modernized equipment and structural efficiencies in the workplace. We should work to promote those gains to keep American workers and businesses more competitive. An important step we can take is to pass the National Competitiveness Act early this session. This legislation will broaden the base for modernizing our manufacturing capability. Its purpose is to help the United States regain world leadership in developing, deploying, and using advanced manufacturing technology. Another significant step for sound economic growth is in the solid progress made in world trade. Passage of NAFTA last year and agreement on GATT this year puts us on the threshold of an expanded world trading economy, from which American businesses, workers, and consumers will all benefit. We will take up the implementing legislation for the GATT agreement. GATT will reduce nontariff barriers to trade and gradually lower tariffs on a reciprocal basis. It will expand the potential market for American made goods without abandoning safeguards against unfair foreign trade practices. Americans have always prospered from expanded trade, and the combination of NAFTA and GATT creates an opportunity for renewed economic growth and expansion into the next century. A strong economy gives us the opportunity to move effectively on long-delayed but essential reforms. The most important will be health care reform. Health care costs now affect one-seventh of our economy. No other advanced nation spends as much of its resources, private and public, on health care. But despite our enormous investment, our citizens do not have health care security. The taxpayers of many other countries have that security--they do not have to fear losing coverage when they have an illness. Their career choices are not dictated by health insurance considerations. In many instances, they have better health outcomes, in terms of life expectancies, infant mortality rates, and other broad measures of well being. At its best, American health care cannot be matched. It is the best in the world; the highest quality health care that is available anywhere. But too many Americans do not have access to that high quality care. Too many get virtually no care. We have to correct that and I believe we can. I will do everything in my power to see that we do. Health care reform must guarantee all Americans access to high quality, affordable health care. It must restrain rising health care costs that are sending Americans, both as individuals and as a nation, deeper into debt. We have to reform the system to preserve its best features and correct its failings. I believe that can be done. After more than a decade of negative reports on our schools and piecemeal reforms, we are going to respond to the demand of parents that the schools provide the education and the basic skills our children need. One of the first bills we will take up this year is Goals 2000, an effort to provide nationally what many individual schools and communities have learned locally: That reforms can work, American children can and do learn eagerly, and Americans will support schools when they are effective. No child graduating from high school into the workplace should be without the skills to compete for a decent job. No child moving to higher education should have to face remedial courses in basic skills such as reading and comprehension. Goals 2000 is the first practical step in bringing reforms into the educational mainstream. Children are our No. 1 resource. We have to invest in their education now to reap the benefits of a well-trained, competitive workforce in the future. We must also make a beginning on ending the waste of human resources represented in our welfare system. President Clinton is committed to ending welfare as we know it. We have to take measures to move welfare recipients into the workforce so they can become productive, self-supporting members of the community, so their families can grow up in an environment of work and security, where people daily earn and renew the self-respect that comes from work and effort. We can restore and preserve the original purpose of welfare: A safety net for those suffering misfortune, the loss of a breadwinner or serious illness or disability. But we must end welfare as a way of life. We have to provide individuals the support and assistance they need to move into the workforce, to replace a system which today provides strong disincentives to leaving welfare. That will not be easy and it will not be cheap. But in the long term, it is the most cost-effective answer and it is the only answer for the children now trapped in the system. Americans expect and have a right to expect that their homes and neighborhoods will be safe. Violence has reached unprecedented and unacceptable levels when American children are 15 times more at risk of death from shooting than the children of Northern Ireland--let me repeat that: American children are now more than 15 times at risk from shooting than are the children of Northern Ireland; that is unacceptable--when 50,000 elementary and middle school children were shot to death between 1979 and 1991, when homicide is the third leading cause of death for minors. Even in rural Maine, which has been spared the worst of the crime epidemic, people are frightened of random violence. The Senate has passed its major crime package and we are going to work with the House to move it to conference and passage as quickly as possible. Our cities and neighborhoods need the police presence that the bill will fund. Our corrections personnel need the drug treatment funding to end the revolving prison door of arresting and releasing addicts without end. All Americans should know that those who abide by the law, who play by the rules, are the focus of public safety. We have to give the people trying to make a decent life in the midst of crime a better chance. Americans expect safety from violence, but they also expect to live in a clean, safe environment. The reports of massive drinking water threats in the Midwest and in the Nation's Capital recently have highlighted the importance of a safe environment. This year we will take up the reauthorizations of the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Clean Water Act, and Superfund. These are all important parts of the whole which protect fundamental health and well-being in our communities. Americans want government to respect and respond to their needs, not to the needs of narrow special interest groups. The most important step we can take in that respect is to complete action on campaign finance reform legislation. American voters should feel their volunteer work and their votes count as much as the wealth of special interests. I hope we will finally be able to act on campaign finance reform this year. We have a lot of work to do. I expect the session to be a tough one. It is going to demand hard work, many hours and a willingness to look beyond partisan advantage for solutions that will work best for all Americans--not for Democratic or Republican solutions, but for solutions that work for all Americans. Our first session was very productive: Family leave, national service, solid deficit reduction, motor voter legislation, the Brady bill. I hope we will, this year, build on that success. If we can, this Congress could, in the end, do more to improve the lives of American families than any in the last quarter century. ____________________
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order, the Republican leader, Dole, is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is DOLE and he says  President, I join with my friend, the distinguished majority leader, in welcoming back our colleagues and also our Senate Chaplain, Reverend Halverson, to the 2d session of the 103d Congress. I share the views expressed by the majority leader with reference to southern California. I have just spoken to Governor Wilson by telephone 30 minutes ago. He indicated his interest and his concern about not moving so quickly that we do not have the accurate figures. But I assure my colleagues from California and the House delegation that the Republican leader will be happy to work with them. We do have an ambitious agenda to tackle this session, and we are ready to roll up our sleeves and go to work. I think everybody who went home during the recess got a pretty good idea what the American people are thinking about. I think the first thing they are thinking about is crime. The American people want decisive action on crime in America. There is also concern about welfare reform and, obviously, concern about health care reform. I think one thing that I, at least, picked up when I went home is that people reflect time and again that we have the best health care system in the world; let us not try to mess it up; it is the envy of the world. I think we need to be careful as we look at health care reform. And I would hope the President tonight would embrace the Senate- passed crime bill and say this is a good bill. There are some provisions that probably are not that good. But I think primarily there are a lot of good provisions with reference to the victims of crime and also those who commit crimes with a gun, those who commit three violent crimes, and death for drug kingpins. There are a lot of good provisions that I think would stem the tide and indicate that we are serious about doing something. But, when it comes to spending taxpayers' dollars, of course we are going to have the balanced budget debate. I see one of the principal sponsors on the floor. That will take some time, as I understand it, looking at the Presiding Officer. I am not certain where the votes are. But, in addition, we have a 50-point plan on this side that we will be talking about, a 50-point plan to save $50 billion during the next 5 years. And with reference to the deficit, it is forecast to be $180 billion, about $100 billion lower than expected. I think it is well to understand where the $180 billion came from: $50 billion came from new taxes, imposed by our colleagues on the other side of the aisle; only about $5 billion in spending cuts; the rest of it was reestimates, $38 billion alone in reestimating the savings and loan costs. So, reestimates and $5 billion in cuts, and 10 to 1 in taxes is how that deficit has been reduced. I assume if you raise taxes enough, you probably will reduce the deficit some. We stand ready with our colleagues on the other side of the aisle, as we did on the North American Free-Trade Agreement, not only to cooperate but to vote and support the majority leader in every way we can. And when we have fundamental differences, it is our obligation as the minority, just as it was when the Democrats were in the minority, it is our obligation not just to oppose but to provide alternatives. Try to work it out, try to help, but where we have a basic, fundamental difference in principle then we will flatly oppose efforts if we think they are taking America in the wrong direction. So we look forward to the year ahead. We will be talking about specific issues outlined by the distinguished majority leader. We look forward to a busy year ahead, which will kick off tonight with the President's State of the Union Message and the Republican response. And I know the President is preparing his State of the Union Message, probably as we speak. And we look forward to hearing the President. It is important to have the President outline what his goals are for 1994. As I indicated earlier, where we can be helpful, where we think they are moving America in the right direction, certainly we want to be supportive and cooperative in every way that we can. So we are back. We are ready to go to work. We hope that we can accomplish many of the things outlined by the majority leader, and I thank the Chair and I yield the floor. ____________________
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order, the Senate will now proceed to vote on the motion to instruct the Sergeant at Arms to request the attendance of absent Senators. A rollcall vote has not been ordered. The majority leader.
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I ask for the yeas and nays.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The yeas and nays have been requested. Is the demand sustained? It is. The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll. The result was announced--yeas 100, nays 0, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 1 Leg.] YEAS--100 Akaka Baucus Bennett Biden Bingaman Bond Boren Boxer Bradley Breaux Brown Bryan Bumpers Burns Byrd Campbell Chafee Coats Cochran Cohen Conrad Coverdell Craig D'Amato Danforth Daschle DeConcini Dodd Dole Domenici Dorgan Durenberger Exon Faircloth Feingold Feinstein Ford Glenn Gorton Graham Gramm Grassley Gregg Harkin Hatch Hatfield Heflin Helms Hollings Hutchison Inouye Jeffords Johnston Kassebaum Kempthorne Kennedy Kerrey Kerry Kohl Lautenberg Leahy Levin Lieberman Lott Lugar Mack Mathews McCain McConnell Metzenbaum Mikulski Mitchell Moseley-Braun Moynihan Murkowski Murray Nickles Nunn Packwood Pell Pressler Pryor Reid Riegle Robb Rockefeller Roth Sarbanes Sasser Shelby Simon Simpson Smith Specter Stevens Thurmond Wallop Warner Wellstone Wofford So, the motion was agreed to.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  A quorum is present. The majority leader is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the President of the Senate be authorized to appoint a committee on the part of the Senate to join with a like committee on the part of the House of Representatives to escort the President of the United States to the House Chamber for the Joint Session to be held at 9 p.m. this evening.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Without objection, the request of the majority leader is agreed to.
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, parliamentary inquiry. Is it appropriate now for the Presiding Officer to appoint the members of the committee pursuant to the resolution just adopted?
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  It is.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  appointed Mitchell and Dole as members of the committee. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I send a resolution to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The clerk will report the resolution by title. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: A resolution (S. Res. 177) informing the President of the United States that a quorum of each House is assembled.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Is there objection to the present consideration of the resolution? There being no objection, the resolution (S. Res. 177) was considered and agreed to, as follows: S. Res. 177 Resolved, That a committee consisting of two Senators be appointed to join such committee as may be appointed by the House of Representatives to wait upon the President of the United States and inform him that a quorum of each House is assembled and that the Congress is ready to receive any communication he may be pleased to make.
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the resolution was agreed to.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I send a resolution to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The clerk will state the resolution by title. The legislative clerk read as follows: A resolution (S. Res. 178) informing the House of Representatives that a quorum of the Senate is assembled.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Is there objection to the present consideration of the resolution? There being no objection, the resolution (S. Res. 178) was considered and agreed to, as follows: S. Res. 178 Resolved, That the Secretary inform the House of Representatives that a quorum of the Senate is assembled and that the Senate is ready to proceed to business.
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the resolution was agreed to.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, under the previous order, the Senate was to now go into recess to accommodate the respective party conferences. I ask unanimous consent that I be recognized to address the Senate for 3 minutes, and that following my remarks Senator Feinstein be recognized to address the Senate for 10 minutes, and that thereafter Senator Boxer be recognized to address the Senate for 10 minutes, and that thereafter Senator Gramm of Texas be recognized to address the Senate for 8 minutes, and that upon the conclusion of Senator Gramm's remarks the Senate stand in recess.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Is there objection to the several requests? Hearing no objection, the requests are agreed to. The majority leader is recognized for 3 minutes. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent the provision of the previous order that the recess continue until 2:30 p.m. remain in effect.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President and Members of the Senate, recently the Nation lost one of its great public servants, the former Speaker of the House of Representatives, Tip O'Neill. It is one of my regrets that I never had the honor of serving in leadership with the late Speaker. He was proof that the American political system can and does elevate people of ability and effectiveness to high public office. His warmth, humor, and love of public service and politics were legendary in his own lifetime. His passing was as sincerely mourned by those who knew him only at a distance--indeed by those who did not know him personally--as by those who knew him best. Speaker O'Neill was a man of the people and he never forgot those who elected him to office or where he came from. He was a loyal Democrat, but he sought to be loyal to the Party's ideals, not to any one individual. When he thought the Party was mistaken he stood up and said so, as he did in breaking with President Johnson on the war in Vietnam. He remained on good personal terms with President Reagan even when they disagreed, as they frequently did. His career in public life spanned half a century, from the years of President Franklin Roosevelt to the years of President Ronald Reagan. He came to Washington in 1953, at the beginning of the Eisenhower era, to continue the work he began amid the great hardships of the Depression years to keep on helping the people of his district realize the American dream of a secure life and a good future for their children. The achievement of the American dream for all people was a goal he never abandoned. He never turned his back on the confidence that fueled the years of the New Deal, when Americans knew that Government could be a tool for innovative and positive action to help its people. He believed that Government exists for the people, not the other way around, and he believed it was the obligation of the Government to serve the vast majority of the people, not to force the bulk of the people to serve the interests of a narrow few. Speaker O'Neill was harshly criticized in his last years in office, but he never allowed the voices of critics to drown out the authentic voice of the people on whose behalf he worked. He remained, to his last days in office, a servant of the public and proudly so. His is a career of which Democrats should be proud, and one from which all Americans can learn much. President, I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order, the Senator from California [Feinstein] is recognized for not to exceed 10 minutes.
 
The speaker is FEINSTEIN and he says  Thank you very much, President, I thank you for this opportunity. ____________________
 
The speaker is FEINSTEIN and he says  President, I would like to take a few moments to report on the tragic 6.6 earthquake that struck southern California just 8 days ago. I know my colleague, Senator Boxer, will also want to speak. We were both able to fly over the earthquake area, to visit the rubble in Northridge, Santa Monica, Hollywood, and all throughout the San Fernando Valley. I visited shelters and schools. The harsh reality is that more people were left homeless by the Northridge earthquake than by Hurricane Andrew, which until now was considered the worst natural disaster in modern American history. Now, those who lost homes, businesses, and loved ones turn to the Federal Government and to this Congress, as well as to the State, for assistance. Let me talk about the damage caused by the earthquake. This was a newly discovered fault which had a lateral thrust up on the two converging plates. This resulted in sudden and very strong vertical acceleration so that the damage that was done was considerably higher than other 6.6 earthquakes. The epicenter was in the heart of an urban area for the first time. The devastation is worse than the 7.1 Loma Prieta earthquake in 1989, or any earthquake in California, with the possible exception of the 1906 San Andreas temblor in San Francisco. In the last 8 days, there have been 2,500 aftershocks, each one rendering more damage, and some of them close to 5 on the Richter scale. Hospitals such as St. John's in Santa Monica have been condemned. Freeways were closed, including the one freeway that carries more people than any other in America--350,000 people a day. After 8 days, here are some statistics: 57 people dead; of 20,000 buildings inspected, 1,057 structures, including about 13,000 dwelling units, have been declared uninhabitable, and this is less than half of the buildings that need inspection; 9,000 people have been treated for injuries, and 1,241 hospitalized. In excess of 20,000 people, I estimate, are homeless. More than 14,000 have been given shelter in tents erected by the Army and the National Guard; in shelters operated by the Red Cross and the Salvation Army; and with supplies from volunteer organizations. As many as four hospitals have been closed and 10 percent of the hospital beds in the area cannot be used. These are St. John's, the Panorama-Kaiser Hospital, the U.S. Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Sepulveda, and the Los Angeles County/USC Psychiatric Pavilion. As many as 76 schools will not open today because of the earthquake. As a result, 65,000 students who attend these schools will stay home today. There is a great need for Federal assistance. According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the need for assistance--particularly housing assistance--is even greater than Hurricane Andrew. In 1 hour alone, FEMA received 15,000 calls for help which it could not answer. To date, 99,000 applications for assistance have been filed with FEMA. Initially, FEMA set up 11 disaster assistance centers. I sent members of my staff to each site, where they have helped cut redtape, responded to human needs, and alerted me of progress. These centers were initially overwhelmed by demand. FEMA has been flexible, and they have ironed out problems. They have extended hours. There will be 16 centers by the end of today located in Northridge, Santa Monica, Tarzana, Santa Clarita, Sylmar, Simi Valley, Van Nuys, Fillmore, Hollywood, Sherman Oaks, Calabasas, San Fernando, Glendale, and three in Los Angeles. The early damage estimates range from $15 billion to $30 billion. But it is still too early to know the full extent of the damage since much of the damage will only be known once full structural surveys have been completed. I would like to compliment the administration, particularly the President, who took the time to fly out to see the damage firsthand; Secretary Cisneros, who is still in southern California and who has made 10,000 section 8 housing vouchers available which provide rental assistance for 1\1/2\ years. Secretary of Transportation Pena was out there to bring in additional rail cars for the Metrolink system which provides rail transportation from the affected areas to Los Angeles. I would like to thank FEMA Director James Witt, who is still in the region, for his hands-on authority. FEMA has responded. They have responded with alacrity. I want to thank the mayor of Los Angeles, Mayor Riordan; the Governor of the State of California, Pete Wilson; and his emergency operations director, Dick Andrews. This has been a true bipartisan effort to respond. And now our job is to keep it that way because this morning Leon Panetta, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, met with the California congressional delegation, and right at this time he is announcing that a supplemental appropriations bill will be proceeding forthwith through the House of Representatives. The figures in this supplemental--and I want to stress this, because the Governor of California has just called--can be amended. I know the Governor has spoken to the Republican leader indicating his concern that an early supplemental will not reflect the true nature of the vastness of the devastation. The fact of the matter is that the supplemental can be amended as it moves through the process and as figures are cleared. The administration has also indicated their commitment to do just that. I have spoken directly with chairman of the Appropriations Committee, Robert C. Byrd, who has assured me of his 100-percent support to move the supplemental appropriations bill forward as rapidly as possible. We very much appreciate the Senator's support. I also spoke with my chairman on the HUD/VA Subcommittee, who spoke with singular enthusiasm, as only Senator Mikulski can, about her willingness to see that that subcommittee responds promptly and with alacrity. I also appreciate her support. As a member of the Appropriations Committee, I will do everything I possibly can to see that funds are expedited and that they are adequate once they reach the committee. Yet, the Federal Government alone cannot possibly secure all of the funds necessary for a full recovery. I believe it is critical that the State of California put together a fair-share plan whereby all State resources--bond issues, tax increases, if necessary--are used to assist in the recovery. Anything short of a full partnership between the State and the Federal Government will not be sufficient to meet this tremendous need. Immediately following the disaster, as you know, FEMA pays 100 percent of the cost of the first 72 hours, and the President extended this for 5 additional days. From that point on, it is usual for FEMA to pay 75 percent and the local jurisdiction 25 percent. The administration has waived this, and so the match will be 90-10. That is very helpful to the hard-pressed State of California. While the first priority of government is to provide emergency assistance for the disaster, I also believe it is incumbent upon all California officials to reevaluate the building code. In both Loma Prieta and this earthquake, I observed where wood frame construction was not adequate, and the loss of life in housing, both in Loma Prieta as well as in this earthquake, came in wood frame construction. And so improvements need to be made and codes need to be updated. It has also been reported that only 25 percent of Californians have earthquake insurance because of the high cost of premiums and the high deductibility. It is incumbent upon us, I believe, to produce legislation to mandate affordable earthquake insurance. Senator Boxer and I will work together in that regard, and the administration has made the secretary of the cabinet available as a point person to help us in that effort. But throughout this tragedy, what has been the most amazing, has been the people. This is just remarkable. Volunteers of the Salvation Army reported immediately to work, despite the fact that their homes were demolished. Corporate Citizens donated food, tents, supplies. Firefighters and police from Los Angeles and from the neighboring communities worked around the clock. The amazing resilience and the determination of people came through over and over again. In a crisis, people who have never ever asked for a handout for the first time came for help. I saw one elderly woman in her eighties whose husband had just died, who was standing outside of a shelter, homeless, saying, ``What will I do now? How will I be able to live? First my husband and now this.'' I ask unanimous consent that a copy of a recent Los Angeles Times story be printed in the Congressional Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: [From the Los Angeles Times, Jan. 24, 1994] Tragedy Before Dawn--Earthquake Was Merciless, Indiscriminate in Claiming Its Victims (By J. Michael Kennedy, Sheryl Stolberg, Marc Lacey, Doug Smith, and John Johnson) The numbers kept climbing as first the hours, then the days, slipped by. The names of the dead. The young, the old. Businessmen and homemakers. An ex-con on Skid Row. A 4-year-old girl who loved frilly skirts and pink cowboy boots. More than 50 in all. Roughly a third were in a single apartment complex whose upper two floors collapsed. One couple died when their vast collection of books and model trains fell on them as they slept. An electrician died when he picked up a high voltage wire draped across a car, an act of heroism turned to tragedy. A woman may have literally died of fright as she rushed to check on her infant son. In the dark, a motorcycle policeman did not see where the temblor had opened a gash in an overpass. Most of the victims were still in bed when Monday's quake shook the earth at 4:31 a.m. with unrelenting anger. Others risked danger to help someone else. Together, they were the grimmest statistics in this, one of the costliest disasters in U.S. history. Here are some of their stories. youngest victim had a last beautiful weekend Amy Tyre-Vigil.--It had been, in Anastacio Vigil's words, ``a beautiful weekend.'' His wife, Nancy Tyre, and 4-year-old daughter, Amy, had gone to a concert. He had taken Amy on a bike ride. The whole family had gone to the zoo. And Amy had sampled her first meatball Sunday night. Vigil and Tyre, both 40, had chatted happily about the future, about the second baby, a boy, on the way, about the new house they were going to buy once their Sherman Oaks home sold. Tyre, who like her husband is a family-practice doctor, told a friend she looked forward to having a bigger place when the baby came. All of that, gone in an instant. Amy was buried Friday afternoon, the youngest victim of the temblor. More than 200 mourners said goodby to the dark-haired girl who loved her artwork, her nursery school, and chocolate chip cookies without nuts. Her mother was not among those present. Instead, a rabbi went to Valley Presbyterian Hospital to join Tyre, seven months pregnant and bedridden with a broken pelvis, in reciting Yizkor, the Jewish prayer for the dead. Amy was crushed when the earthquake sent her home hurtling down its hillside, collapsing it into a flattened wreck of wood and stucco, tile and glass. Her father does not remember much about what happened. ``It felt like somebody picked up the house and just violently shook it. Nancy said, `Get Amy!' As I was getting up there was a big flash of light and a terrible crashing sound. The next thing I remember, I was trapped.'' In the darkness, pinned under boards, able only to wiggle his right foot, Vigil heard his wife moaning that she could not breathe. He listened for his daughter, but heard nothing. The silence worried him. He concentrated on trying to calm his wife. ``Breathe slowly,'' he told her. ``Breathe slowly. We're going to be OK.'' The couple lay there for at least an hour on the ground amid the ruins, too far away to touch one another, talking as they shivered in the cold. Finally, they heard voices. It was the neighbors, venturing outside for the first time. It took an hour for the rescue workers to pick their way through the rubble. They freed Vigil first. ``I felt a human hand on my leg,'' he said, ``and it was just the most beautiful feeling.'' He suffered a broken rib, and injuries to his leg and jaw, but he told the doctor who treated him at Sherman Oaks Hospital that he could not stay, that he needed a taxi. He had to find his wife and daughter. Sit down, the doctor told him. He would make some calls. The emergency physician learned that Tyre and Amy had been taken to Valley Presbyterian. He also learned what had happened to Amy. Gently, he told Vigil that his daughter had been killed. Though the crisis was mounting at his own hospital, the doctor drove Vigil to see his injured wife. Tyre looked better than he expected. And the baby would be fine. He grabbed her, held her close, and whispered the wrenching words: ``We lost her.'' and her son will really not have known her at all Elizabeth Brace.--Earthquakes terrified Elizabeth Brace. As a young girl, her family's home had been heavily damaged by the Sylmar quake in 1971. Her husband, Thomas, said there was a certain way she acted when the earth rumbled, a kind of tenseness until the shaking stopped and the danger passed. At the time of their marriage, he was 43, she 31. They had set about quickly to begin a family. Elizabeth had quit her job when Michelle was born five years ago, followed by Christopher 3\1/2\ years later. Three years ago, the Braces moved to Rancho Cucamonga in San Bernardino County. They wanted a bigger house and a decent school district. Elizabeth had become a Scout leader when Michelle was old enough to be a Daisy. She volunteered as a room mother a couple of days a week when Michelle started kindergarten this year. It was the good life in a quiet, suburban way. There was little to make Sunday evening apart from others. Elizabeth had an appointment Monday morning. She was trying to earn some extra money while working at home and was thinking of doing the billing for a local doctor. And then, before dawn, the quake hit. The couple held each other in those first frightening moments. They did it instinctively because of Elizabeth's fears. Then, a few seconds later, she got up and raced for Christopher's room. Thomas went to Michelle's. What Thomas remembers next was a loud noise in the next room. Not a cry. More like something falling. ``She was just lying on the floor,'' said Thomas, a computer programmer. ``She was unconscious and bleeding from the nose and mouth. I tried CPR but I don't think I did a good job of it. I'm not trained for that kind of thing. ``I called 911 and when I came back she was still,'' Thomas said. ``I couldn't feel a pulse.'' Paramedics arrived in minutes, but could not revive her. Early on, there was speculation that Elizabeth, 37, may have died when she tripped on a toy. The San Bernardino coroner's office said it would take at least six weeks for the test results. Deputy Coroner Gabriel Morales said fright as a cause of death, perhaps in the form of a huge adrenal rush, is not being ruled out. That's what Thomas suspects: ``If I were to speculate, I would guess she died of fright and panic.'' Thomas, sitting on his living room couch a few days after the earthquake, worked hard to hold back his tears as he talked about his wife and how good their life had been. ``She was such a terrific mother and had gotten the job of raising the children started so well,'' he said. ``And her son will really not have known her at all.'' son wrote his epitaph: ``if it weren't for fate * * *'' Howard and James Lee.--Just weeks before his death, Howard Lee wrote his epitaph. ``If it weren't for fate, I might be somewhere else,'' the 14-year-old boy wrote in an autobiography for school entitled ``My Life.'' The sentence proved as cruelly ironic as anything connected with the quake. Howard was killed in his bed, a Golf digest he had been reading close at hand. Rescurers who arrived at the Northridge Meadows apartments could still hear Howard--a tall, always-smiling boy who was thinking of becoming a priest--calling out from the ruins of Apartment 101. Around him in the darkness, 15 other people died in the building collapse. Among them was his father, Pil, 46, trapped in the bathroom where he had been brushing his teeth before heading off to work as an RTD mechanic. ``Help me! Help me!'' Howard shouted. Rescuers kept telling the voice to hold on, just a little longer. But the building had shifted 10 feet to the north when it collapsed and they could not locate them, even with the help of Howard's mother, who had been pulled from the wreckage earlier, along with her other son, 12-year-old Jason. Finally, they found a pillow and showed it to Hyun Lee, who said, yes, that belonged to Howard, whom she affectionately called her ``big son.'' Then they found him. ``This son is dead, ma'am,'' said the firefighter. ``He is dead.'' Hyun Soon Lee, a deeply religious woman with a cascade of rich black hair, burst into tears, letting go of the thin thread of hope she had held onto for four house. ``Can I see him?'' she asked, Hours later, her husband's body was brought out, the last recovered from the ruins. Ex-Con Had a Temper, but He Was a ``FUN-Loving Guy'' Jose Louis Hernandez.--The initial news reports were sketchy: A mentally ill ex-convict had either jumped or fallen from a Skid Row flophouse during the quake. Good Samaritan Hospital called him John Doe No. 17 and said he died of head injuries caused by a very long fall. The police report provided a bit more information: He lived in Room 610 of the Frontier Hotel. His window had been open. He was found by police lying on his back on the sidewalk, wearing only blue boxer shorts. A down-and-out drifter when he died, Jose Louis Hernandez had a hearty laugh, a violent temper and a long criminal record. He also had four sons, a daughter and a granddaughter, although he had been out of touch with his family for two years. ``He had a temper but he was a good man,'' said his niece, Eileen Moreno. ``He was a fun-loving guy.'' Just out of state prison, the 49-year-old Hernandez settled into a studio at the Frontier, a once-grand hotel at Main and 5th streets that had fallen victim to the grittiness around it. Across the street from two porn theaters and a liquor store, the Frontier charges $11.99 a night. A childhood friend, John Seanez, used to joke with Hernandez about his short, pudgy build. Growing up on the Eastside in the 1950s, Seanez and Hernandez were homeboys, partying together and once getting thrown off a city bus for guzzling beers. ``He was a pretty good guy when we were young,'' said Seanez, who also lives at the Frontier. But Hernandez drifted from his friends and drifted from his family. He also drifted in and out of jail. Since 1962, he served time for resisting arrest, petty theft, possession of heroin and cocaine, driving while intoxicated, assault with a deadly weapon and hit and run. He once threatened a hotel employee's life when his toilet got clogged. But he also said ``thank you'' after picking up his mail. He sometimes heard voices and was taking psychotropic drugs for his condition. His parole officer, Robert Humphrey, had no problems with Hernandez. Since leaving prison on Thanksgiving, Hernandez had reported regularly, found a place to live and applied for government aid. Said Humphrey: ``He was doing pretty good on parole, up until his recent demise.'' Officer ``Was Quick to Help and That NEVER Changed'' Clarence Wayne Dean.--Minutes after the earthquake hit, Clarence Dean was putting on his uniform. He was a motorcycle cop. He had spent more than half his life with the Los Angeles Police Department, graduating from the academy in 1968 after four years in the Marines. He had worked the streets--first as a patrol officer and later as a motorcycle cop--for nearly 25 years. A colleague said his blond hair ``always looked like he had just taken his helmet off.'' On the morning of the earthquake, Dean was not scheduled to start work until 7 a.m., but the temblor apparently jolted him out of bed. The 46-year-old officer left his Lancaster home and headed for work on his motorcycle, blue lights flashing in the night. As he drove south in the darkness, he rounded a bend on an Antelope Valley Freeway interchange. Dean and his motorcycle plunged 30 feet from the roadway, which had been severed in the quake. As he fell, the lights of the motorcycle continued to flash. ``No one called him, no one made him come in that morning,'' said Danny Staggs, president of the Los Angeles Police Protective League, who knew Dean. ``He was doing this to help people.'' Dean, the divorced father of two children, was remembered as a gregarious man who was quick with a joke or a story. ``He was quick to work and quick to help and that never changed,'' Sgt. Rod Grehek said. ``You wonder what was going through his mind those last few seconds.'' If Anyone Needed Help, Kevin Was the First to Offer Kevin C. Maher.--A grim reminder of one quake tragedy is burned into the ground. On a grassy patch at Murietta Avenue and Valleyheart Drive in Sherman Oaks, two charred footprints show exactly where a downed power line electrocuted Kevin C. Maher. The line was dangling over a car with a young child inside; the distraught mother stood nearby. Maher a 25-year-old electrician who grew up in Ireland, ran back to his apartment for tools. He ignored the warnings of others at the scene. ``People were yelling at him, `No! Don't touch it!''' said James Pianezzola, 30, who saw the whole thing. ``He turned around and said, `Don't worry, I'm an electrician.' But as soon as he touched the line, his body went stiff as a board.'' (The child was snatched from the car by another onlooker.) Maher, who was from Carrick-on-Shannon and never lost his brogue after 10 years in the U.S., was hailed as a hero in Ireland, his death making the front pages of the dailies back home. In the San Fernando Valley, his friends recalled him as a generous man who died doing what he always did. If anyone needed help, Kevin was the first to offer,'' said Paula Shields, a friend who lived in the same apartment complex. ``The Irish community always comes together when something like this happens,'' said Kathleen Harney, Maher's sister. ``We're all far away from home so we stick close together out here.'' Couple Labored Hard to Earn Their House on the Hillside Marc Yobs and Karen Osterholt.--Marc Yobs was going places. Just ask anyone who knew him. He was 32 and on top of his game. Good-looking, with a caring way and easy grin, he had accomplished the nearly impossible early in his career, getting a foot in the door into Hollywood with nary a connection. Now, he was handling some of the industry's biggest accounts for The Post Group, which does sound and special effects for film. His bosses had recently promoted him. ``There's a lot of phoniness and glad-handing in Hollywood,'' said Kristen Ralph, the company president. ``Marc never had that kind of self-opinion. He was confident, and very bright, and quite sure of his own abilities. But he was not one of the let's-do-lunch types.'' Two years ago, Yobs bought the house of his dreams: a $400,000 hillside home in Sherman Oaks, with a sweeping view of the San Fernando Valley, where he grew up. He shared it with Karen Osterholt, 30, his girlfriend of nine years. The place was a showpiece. Yobs was meticulous about maintaining it, as he was about everything else in his life. Osterholt had a flair for decorating, and she filled it with antiques. If he was the go-getter, she was the quiet power behind him. She was with him when he had nothing, supporting him with her earnings as a waitress while he struggled to climb the Hollywood ladder. The house made Waldrop nervous, no matter how many times her daughter assured her it was safe. It was 30 years old and had survived both the Sylmar and the Whittier Narrows quakes. But fears of a temblor must have passed through Yobs' mind, because a year ago he bought earthquake insurance. In 10 seconds, it came crashing down, taking them with it. They were to be buried side by side. There is nothing left of the Sherwood Place house. It is a pile of twisted metal and wood. The homes to the right and left, built at the same time, by the same builder, according to Dave Yobs, are still standing. Uninhabitable, but standing. ``Why his house?'' Dave Yobs said tearfully. ``With all those homes, why his?'' If There Is a Bright Spot . . . It's That They Went Together Robert Pauline and Judith Ng.--When they met at Riverside City College in the early 1970s, Robert (Sarge) Pauline had just retired from a 20-year career with the Chula Vista Police Department. Judith Ng, 30 years younger, was just out of high school. The couple married, beginning an eccentric life together. ``In the beginning the whole family was against the situation,'' said one of Ng's brothers, Kenneth. ``We thought: `What was this old guy doing with our sister?' But over the years, we've come to love him like family. It was unique but it was right for them.'' The couple squirreled themselves away in their Van Nuys home, inviting neither friends nor family inside. In this neat suburban neighborhood, they had shrubs and vines shielding their house from the street. Inside, their living quarters were unconventional as well. They were avid collectors. Everywhere, there were stacks of old letters, out-of-date calendars, model trains, stereo equipment and cameras. When the earthquake hit, neighbors and relatives became concerned about the mysterious pair. Their house survived but there was no word from Ng, 42, or Pauline, 72. The next day, authorities entered their Kittridge Street home and discovered the couple in bed, crushed by hundreds of pounds of their own collectibles. ``If there is a bright spot to this,'' said Ng's sister, Kathy Ng Norwood, ``it's that they went together.''
 
The speaker is FEINSTEIN and he says  This article describes the victims, President, who lost their lives in the initial hours of the earthquake. Everybody knows somebody who was affected; 57 people died, but among them was a 4-year-old by the name of Amy Tyre-Vigil. Her father described the weekend before the earthquake as ``a beautiful weekend.'' He had taken Amy on a bike ride. The whole family had gone to the zoo. Amy had sampled her first meatball Sunday night. Amy's parents had chatted happily about the future, about a second baby, a boy, on the way, about the new house they were going to buy once their Sherman Oaks home sold, and that was gone in an instant on Monday. Amy was crushed to death when the earthquake sent her home hurtling down a hillside, collapsing the home into a flattened wreck of wood and stucco, tile and glass. For the victims of the earthquake, for the parents of 4-year-old Amy Tyre-Vigil, the time for action is now. I look forward to working with my colleague, Senator Boxer, and my colleagues in the Senate of the United States, on the Federal Government's response to set a new standard for all future emergency recovery efforts. I thank all of those from Washington who have cared so much about the State of California and responded so positively. I thank the Chair and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order, the Senator from California [Boxer] is recognized for not to exceed 10 minutes. ____________________
 
The speaker is BOXER and he says  President, thank you for the opportunity to speak to the Senate today about the southern California earthquake. Many of our colleagues here in the Senate have expressed concern, and I am very grateful. The people of California need us all right now to assist them, and most of them have never asked a thing from their Government. The 6.6-Richter scale earthquake that devastated parts of the Los Angeles region on January 17, impacted an area the size of Cleveland. The President has declared three counties--Los Angeles, Ventura, and Orange Counties--as disaster areas. I know many of you have been following the televised reports on the quake. Many of these moving pictures have focused really on a few scenes: the awful collapse of the Northridge apartment complex that killed 17 people, the crumbled bridges and the crowded shelters. It has been called the Los Angeles earthquake, but that is misleading. In addition to parts of L.A., this quake ripped through the cities of Santa Monica, San Fernando, Santa Clarita, Burbank, Glendale, Fillmore, Simi Valley, and Thousand Oaks as well as parts of Orange and Ventura Counties. Let me present you the larger picture of an entire region that has undergone horrendous havoc: The initial earthquake left 20,000 to 25,000 homeless. To date 57 have died and 7,500 have been injured. The first day there were 70 structure fires. About 25,000 structures have been damaged, 11,000 are uninhabitable. Initially, electric power was lost to more than 1.4 million customers, with damages to two electric generating plants and severe damage to two substations. Fifty-seven percent of the electric generating power of the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power was down, affecting 800,000 customers. About 20,000 water customers were without service. A water aqueduct was broken in San Fernando Valley, with five major breaks in the area's water system. About 20,000 natural gas customers were without service. The Los Angeles Unified School System shut down, sending 800,000 students home; 150 school are damaged. A Southern Pacific train derailed. Fifteen of 29 cars filled with sulfuric acid wrecked. One tankcar ruptured spilling 5,000 gallons of acid. A crude oil pipeline ruptured in Valencia with oil flowing into the Santa Clara River. An oil pipeline in Huntington and Laurel Canyons caught fire. Crude oil spill into Lake Castaic. Ventura County suffered the partial collapse of the residential Fillmore Hotel. Van Nuys Airport suffered damages including shattered windows in the control tower. Four hospitals were evacuated. A total of 18 hospitals had problems serious enough to force closing of floors or wings. Forty public buildings closed in Los Angeles County were closed due to damage. Another 20 State buildings were closed. By week's end, the Red Cross and Salvation Army had established 41 shelters, plus five National Guard tent sites, housing thousands of people. In addition, the city of Los Angeles set up temporary shelters in 13 parks. President, when I say this tragedy is continuing; it is no rhetorical exaggeration. Aftershocks Sunday morning forced the evacuation of 83 people at the San Fernando High School shelter into nearby tents. The area has suffered more than 1,500 aftershocks, including two that exceeded 5.0 on the Richter scale. This morning the area is under a flash flood watch by the National Weather Service. Mud and debris flows from the nearby hillsides burned in last fall's firestorms are possible. Electrical power was restored to everyone only yesterday. There are still 5,000 without water, and more than 200,000 water customers still have to boil their water because of damaged filtration systems. All but 50 schools will reopen today, still leaving 40,000 students out of class. About 500 Los Angeles classrooms are unusable, according to Education Secretary Riley. At least nine Federal-aid highways were damaged, including 12 bridges. Portions of the Santa Monica Freeway--the busiest highway in the world with about 200,000 cars a day--was severely damaged, including the collapse of two bridges. Interstate 5, the Golden Gate Freeway, the major north-south artery for the Los Angeles basin suffered major damage at three intersections. About 100,000 commuters face tortuous delays. Even with using all available bus and HOV lane options, Caltrans says the affected routes could handle only half the normal volume of traffic. All total, 37 miles of highway are unusable. One piece of good news from the highway scene is that seismic retrofit works. No graphic example exists better than the span of Interstate 10 at Venice-La Cienega. The east and west bound lanes are held up by separate bridges. The span that had seismic protection stood. The lanes where this protection had not yet been retrofitted collapsed. We need to do more to fix our bridges to withstand earthquakes. That was the intent of Congress when it passed the Intermodal Surface Transportation and Efficiency Act, but the way it was interpreted, it is not possible to use Federal bridge funds for seismic upgrade unless the bridge is structurally deficient in other ways. My legislation in committee this week will be on the Senate floor soon. Meanwhile, the economic tremors from this devastation are rippling throughout southern California. The human toll, in addition to the casualties, is equally astounding. There have been more than 100,000 disaster aid applications to date and James Lee Witt, the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, has predicted his Agency could receive 300,000 applications. By comparison, 5 days after the Midwest floods, FEMA received 2,463 requests for aid. Since the quake my California staff has pitched in at the disaster centers and seen the human side of this disaster. They have helped serve meals; helped distribute food, diapers and clothing; and translated for non-English speaking victims making their applications. My staff here in Washington is also volunteering at the FEMA teleregistration phone banks. They heard from a Santa Clarita man, living in his business after his home was destroyed by last fall's fire storms. Now, the earthquake destroyed his business. Lightening did strike twice for his hard working man. A 28-year-old single mother of three was just getting by working at a fast-food restaurant and living at a residential hotel in Ventura County. The quake damaged the hotel, destroying what possessions she had. There was the Sherman Oaks woman escaping with her cat and an armload of clothes. And I will never forget the homes that I saw where precious possessions of families were strewn on the floor--broken--with TV's toppled and refrigerators and dreams too. As I visited Granada Hills, I talked with some young children who were really scared. One told me he barely saved his cat from a falling ladder. He looked at me and asked when he would be in school. Would this be fixed? He was about 11 years old, and he did not have even a little smile. I told him we would fix it--and we must, just as we did for Hurricane Andrew, the Midwest floods and the Loma Prieta earthquake. The President tonight will talk to the Nation about the State of the Union. He will present this week a supplemental appropriations that will help California. He will ask for emergency spending for this measure, as Presidents have done before. Since the enactment of the 1990 Budget Act, there have been four bills including emergency designation for appropriations totaling $8.6 billion in natural disaster assistance. I am very grateful to this President for his strong leadership. The President said in Los Angeles after surveying the scenes of destruction that ``this is a national problem.'' Emergencies are a national problem. California has gone through some very rough spots. In the good years we gave as a State more than we took. And I am convinced that the good years are on the way--with an economic strategy for this Nation that includes the information highway, conversion funds, environmental clean-up technologies and increased trade opportunities. I know that California will be back stronger than ever. In the meantime, we are fixing a bumpy road. I know if we all pull together we will smooth out the bumps and will add to our national economic recovery. President, I thank my colleague, Senator Feinstein. We are a team for California. It seems that we have had more than our share of emergency situations, but we will continue to work together to respond to the needs of the people. Many of our colleagues here have expressed concerns both to Senator Feinstein and to me, and I am very grateful to all of them. The people of California need it right now to assist them and, as Senator Feinstein has pointed out, many of them have never asked for Government help before. The 6.6 Richter scale earthquake that devastated parts of the Los Angeles region impacted an area the size of Cleveland. I say to my friends and colleagues that we have had very strong earthquakes before, but we have not ever had them in the center of such a heavily populated region. So all of the problems that we have had before from disasters, you need to multiply tenfold, twentyfold, thirtyfold, because of the density of the populations. Senator Feinstein talked about this earthquake and its magnitude, which was extraordinary. I read an article in the Los Angeles Times which said that the energy release in this earthquake was enough to launch 2 million NASA space shuttles--2 million NASA space shuttles. We are talking about an extraordinary amount of energy released and damage that followed. Many of you have seen the televised reports, and many of you have seen photos like this one of what happened to the freeway. It is important to note that these freeways that are damaged, including I-5 and Interstate 10, are extremely heavily traveled freeways. Interstate 10 is traveled by maybe as much as 300,000 cars a day, President. I-5 is the lifeline from northern California to southern California. I think it is important to note that in southern California the freeways are our economic and our personal lifeline. That is why we are so very grateful to this administration and to our colleagues for showing their concern and moving quickly forward, in many cases waiving the laws such as the $100 million cap per State and also certainly the 25 percent match. We are very, very grateful. Instead of taking the time to repeat the names Senator Feinstein put out there, let me just say that I add my thanks to those very same people. We know that regarding the homelessness, at first they said 2,000, but I knew that was wrong. I said to the President when he came out last Wednesday, ``President, it is 10 times as much,'' and it is, it is about 25,000 homeless. At one time, 1 million customers, President, had no electricity. We still have thousands of homes without water and electricity, and that is a public health nightmare. I ask unanimous consent that my entire statement be included in the Record, and I will continue to summarize from it.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. President, I think when you hear us tell these personal stories, it really brings it home. When the President came out on Wednesday, he did a walking tour, and I went off, as did Senator Feinstein, on my own to meet with the people. We went into homes and I saw refrigerators toppled on the floor and television sets and all of the people's dreams and possessions just shattered. They were grateful that they had their lives, but they need to rebuild. The Small Business Administration, and Erskine Bowles was out, who is our Director of the SBA, and he was most helpful. We are going to rebuild. I remember this young man who said to me, ``Senator, when can I go to school? I want to go back to school.'' Then he said, ``I saved my cat. The ladder was going to fall on my cat, and I saved my cat. When are you going to fix this, and when are we going to go back to school?'' What you saw among the children always is the trauma, because they need to have their normal life returned, and we need to move quickly. Secretary Riley flew out. He is working with the State officials to get schools reopened. These children need us right now, President. If they have a sense of normalcy, I think that we can move beyond this crisis. One piece of good news from the highway scene is that seismic retrofit works. We can look at, for example, the span of Interstate 10 at Venice-La Cienega. The east and westbound lanes are held up by separate bridges. The span that had seismic protection stood. The lanes where this protection had not been retrofitted collapsed. So it is very important that we continue the seismic retrofit. I must quickly add here that we need to fix many, many bridges. There are about 300 bridges now that need fixing, and they cannot, because of a technicality in the law, apply for seismic retrofit. In the Public Works Committee on Thursday, we hope to make this fix, and that would enable these bridges to be retrofitted. Let me say that my staff has joined with Senator Feinstein's staff. They are feeding people. They, in many cases, recruited their friends; they recruited their spouses. They are working hard. They are working as interpreters. We are hearing stories, for example, of a Santa Clarita man who had his business destroyed in last fall's firestorms and now the earthquake destroyed his home. This is a case where lightning struck twice for this gentleman. We have stories like this on and on. Of course, that is what it is all about--responding to these stories, restoring a sense that people are in control of their destiny. I know that the State of California will work very cooperatively with us. I have never seen such bipartisanship in the congressional delegation in the State. We have many Republicans representing the area and many Democrats. We see people pulling together. So, I am very much an optimist in the long run for California. We already know we are pulling out of this recession. As we look at the strategy of this administration, which includes the information highway and economic conversion funds and environmental cleanup technologies, increased trade opportunities, I know that California will be back stronger than ever. But, in the meantime, we have this bumpy road. I know, President, with your help and the help of everyone who has expressed it thus far, we can pull together, we can smooth out the bumps in the road, and then California will add to this Nation's economic recovery. I thank you very much for your courtesy, President. I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order previously entered, the Senator from Texas [Gramm] is to be recognized for not to exceed 8 minutes.
 
The speaker is GRAMM and he says  President, I would like to say to the Presiding Officer that when I asked for this time, I assumed it would come at the beginning of the session after lunch. I apologize to our distinguished President pro tempore for interrupting his lunch. ____________________
 
The speaker is GRAMM and he says  President, today I am introducing the Consensus Interim Health Act. I think this is an important bill. Let me explain why. We have had seven bills that have been put forward to reform America's health care system, and they vary greatly in terms of how they would go about the task. They represent varying philosophies. They represent various levels of transformation of the current system. But one thing I have noticed is that there are several features that are common to all of these bills. Every one of the health care reform packages put together and introduced or discussed to this point has had a provision to make it possible for people to change jobs in America without losing their health insurance. Every proposal that has been put forward would make health insurance permanent so that when Americans get health insurance, even if they get very sick, they can be guaranteed that they will never see their health insurance policy canceled. Every proposal that has been put forward in some form makes it possible for small business to pool its resources, to be more competitive in being able to spread risk in the purchase of private health insurance. Every proposal that has been put forward in all of the seven bills tries to deal with the overwhelming burden of paperwork. And every one of the proposals put forward in some way or another tries to make it possible for health care providers to purchase health care equipment jointly and to operate it jointly to reduce overhead and reduce cost. President, I will be introducing later a comprehensive bill of my own, which I am proud to say has been cosponsored by many of my colleagues in the Senate and many of my colleagues in the House. But today, I want to introduce a bill which simply does the things that we agree on. This bill, which I call the Consensus Interim Health Act, tries to do the things that we all agree on. My suggestion is that we go ahead and adopt a bill similar to this bill and that we use the consensus that we agree on to hammer out the tough issues later this year to adopt a comprehensive health reform package. What this bill will do is provide a vehicle whereby every American can change jobs without losing his or her health insurance; where every American will know that if they buy a health insurance policy or if they have one now it can never be canceled because they get sick, and if they buy one in the future the rates cannot vary based on their state of health. This bill will allow small businesses to pool their resources to purchase health insurance. It will let groups like the Farm Bureau, churches, and even communities pool resources together to get better rates. It will deal with paperwork by going to the source. The Federal Government pays 31 percent of the bills in health care today and it generates two-thirds of the paperwork. What this bill does is sets out a 5-year program to reduce the amount of paperwork required in Federal programs by 75 percent. It requires the States to do the same. It sets up a private commission made up of health care providers and health insurance purchasers to come up with one form and then, in order to get Government reimbursement, everybody has to use that form. Finally, we change our antitrust laws to let health care providers jointly purchase medical technology to hold down costs and to spread overhead. Every one of these provisions is present in each of the health care reform packages. These are the things that we agree on. President, I think we should begin by acting to give the American people some success. Now, some people say, it is not worth improving the system if you are not going to throw it out and reinvent it. And 75 percent of the 37 million Americans who at least 1 day last year did not have health insurance would see their problems solved if we made insurance portable and if we made insurance permanent. So I think this is an important action. I am disappointed that the President issued a statement today opposing this bill. The President's basic view is if you are not going to reinvent the health care system, if you are not going to destroy what we have and start over in building the health care system in the image of Government, it is not worth doing. Well, I disagree with that, President. But I think more importantly the American people do. This is something we could do now. This is something we could do for the American people. This is something we agree on. And my view is, why should we wait? President, I ask unanimous consent that a summary of the Consensus Interim Health Act be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the summary was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: The Consensus Interim Health Act I. ENHANCE SECURITY FOR THOSE PRESENTLY INSURED BY MAKING PRIVATE INSURANCE PORTABLE AND PERMANENT Portability To enhance the capacity of American workers to change jobs without losing their health insurance coverage, existing law under COBRA (which allows individuals temporarily to continue their health insurance coverage after leaving their place of employment by paying their premiums directly) would be modified to allow individuals two additional lower-cost options to keep their health insurance coverage during their transition between jobs. Workers could: (A) Continue their current insurance coverage during the 18 months covered by COBRA by paying their insurance premiums directly; (B) Continue their current insurance coverage during the 18 months covered by COBRA by paying their insurance premiums directly, but with a lower premium reflecting a $1,000 deductible; or (C) Continue their current insurance coverage during the 18 months covered by COBRA by paying their insurance premiums directly, but with a lower premium reflecting a $3,000 deductible. With these options, the typical monthly premium paid for a family of four would drop by as much as 20 percent when switching to a $1,000 deductible and as much as 52 percent when switching to a $3,000 deductible. In addition, individuals would be permitted to make penalty-free withdrawals from their Individual Retirement Accounts and 401(k)s to pay for health insurance coverage during the transition period. The transition period of coverage would end once a person is in a position to get coverage from another employer. Permanence Health insurance would be made permanent (belonging to the family or individual) by these three reforms. Those with individual coverage (A) No existing health insurance policy can be cancelled due to the state of health of any person covered by the policy. Insurance companies must offer each policy holder the option to purchase a new policy under the conditions of part B of this section with the terms to be negotiated between the buyer and seller of the policy. (B) all individual health insurance policies written after the enactment of this legislation must be guaranteed renewable, and premiums cannot be increased based on the occurrence of illness. Those with group coverage (A) Existing group policies must provide each member of the group the right to convert to an individual policy when leaving the group. This individual policy will be rated based on actuarial data, but cannot be cancelled due to the state of health of those covered by the policy. In addition, any group policy holder (ie. employer obtaining coverage on employees' behalf) will have the right to purchase a new group policy under the conditions stated under part B of this section with the terms to be negotiated between the group's benefactor or representative and the seller of the group policy. (B) All group policies issued after enactment of this legislation must be permanent, and premiums cannot be increased based on the health of the members covered under the group policy. In addition, similar to part A of this section, new group policies must provide each member of the group the right to convert to an individual policy when leaving the group. However, the premium charges of the individual leaving the new group plan cannot be based on the individual's state of health and cannot be cancelled except for nonpayment of premiums. Those with employer-provided self-funded coverage (A) Companies currently operating self-funded plans must make arrangements with one or more private insurers to offer individuals leaving the self-funded plan individual coverage. The individual policy will be rated based on actuarial data, but cannot be cancelled due to the state of health of those covered by the policy. (B) All self-funded plans created after enactment of this legislation must (like part A of this section) make arrangements with one or more private insurers to offer individuals leaving the self-funded plan individual coverage. However, the premium charges of the individual leaving the self-funded plan cannot be based on the individual's state of health and cannot be cancelled except for nonpayment of premiums. ii. allow small businesses to pool their health insurance purchases Regulatory and legal impediments that restrict the ability of small businesses and other organizations (trade and professional groups, churches, etc.) to group together voluntarily to allow their employees or members to pool their health insurance purchases will be removed. iii. enhance efficiency through paperwork reduction (A) Medicaid, Medicare, and all other federal entities involved in the funding or delivery of health care shall standardize their health care forms and must reduce their total health care paperwork burden by 50 percent within two years of enactment of this legislation. The paperwork burden must be reduced by another 50 percent over the following three years, achieving a total paperwork reduction of 75 percent over a 5-year period. (B) State agencies involved in the funding or delivery of health care, like federal entities, shall standardize their health care forms. Also like federal entities, within five years of enactment, states must reduce their total health care paperwork burden by 75 percent in order to remain eligible for federal health assistance. (C) A private commission will be established to develop, within 12 months from enactment, standardized forms to be used by private health care providers and private insurers. In order to receive federal reimbursement, private health care providers and private insurers must use these standardized forms. This commission shall be comprised solely of private health care providers and private insurers. iv. promote efficiency in the health care market by removing antitrust barriers By limiting certain antitrust impediments that restrict cooperative efforts, communities and providers will be given an opportunity to coordinate the delivery of health care and enter into joint ventures that promote greater efficiencies, and expand access. (The remarks of Gramm pertaining to the introduction of S. 1788 are located in today's Record under ``Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.'')
 
The speaker is GRAMM and he says  I think these are important bills. I want to thank the Chair for staying during lunchtime to allow me to speak about them, and I will introduce them at the end of the session. I thank the Chair and yield the floor.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The bills will be received when introduced at the end of the session and appropriately referred. ____________________
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order previously entered, the Senate will now stand in recess until the hour of 2:30 p.m. today. Thereupon, at 1:20 p.m., the Senate recessed until 2:30 p.m.; whereupon, the Senate reassembled when called to order by the Presiding Officer (Kohl). ____________________
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Under the previous order, the hour of 2:30 p.m. having arrived, the Senate will now proceed to the consideration of S. 1281, which the clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: A bill (S. 1281) to authorize appropriations for fiscal years 1994 and 1995 for the Department of State, the United States Information Agency, and related agencies, to provide for the consolidation of international broadcasting activities, and for other purposes. The Senate proceeded to consider the bill.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Chair recognizes the Senator from Rhode Island [Pell].
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, we all welcome my colleagues back to Washington and to this, the second session of the 103d Congress. I am only hopeful that we can get the year off to a fast and productive start with consideration of S. 1281, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for fiscal years 1993 and 1994. This legislation authorizes appropriations for the Department of State, the USIA, and the Board for International Broadcasting. Although this may sound rather prosaic, in fact what the Senate is about to debate is legislation that will shape key instruments of American foreign policy into the 21st century. In no small measure, our Nation's success and prominence in world affairs is the result of these institutions' effectiveness. The legislation before the Senate makes changes in these structures to meet the new challenges to U.S. foreign policy such as: Enhancement of trade opportunities for U.S. businesses, protection of the global environment, and prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Our success in this effort will have a very direct and tangible impact on the lives of U.S. citizens for years to come. For example, the legislation incorporates and endorses the administration's restructuring of the Department of State, particularly the attempt to reduce bureaucratic layering and make Assistant Secretaries more effective in the policy process. Further, it creates a new under secretary for global affairs to oversee policy on many of the issues that transcend national borders. In addition, the legislation as reported by the committee will implement the administration's proposal for the consolidation of United States international broadcasting. As many of my colleagues know, this has been a contentious issue. Later in this debate, the Senate can expect an amendment by Senators Biden and Feingold aimed at resolving their differences over the treatment of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Radio Free Asia under the consolidation proposal. It preserves the cost savings envisioned in the administration and committee-reported proposal, which I know is very important to Senator Feingold, and provides for grantee status for both radios which I know Senator Biden believes is essential to their effective operation. I very much appreciate the two Senators' efforts to work out their differences. President, there are a number of provisions that I have either authored or cosponsored in this legislation. I would like to highlight just two. In particular, I would draw our attention to a provision which requires USIA to open an office in Lhasa, Tibet. In my view, the establishment of such an office will provide the United States with an important on-the-ground presence in Tibet, enabling better understanding of the situation there and promoting more open contacts between the United States and Tibet. As the United States and China seek to improve their relations, this office would be a key outpost in an area of mutual concern. Later in this debate, I will also be offering an amendment to strengthen the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. In conjunction with the administration's own efforts, I think this legislation will significantly enhance our Nation's efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. President, the legislation contains a number of other provisions, but I will leave a more detailed discussion of the bill to my colleague from Massachusetts, Senator Kerry, who is the chairman of the Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics, and International Operations. It is his subcommittee that has jurisdiction over this legislation and I want to congratulate him on the fine work that he has done in bringing the bill to the floor. The Senate has and will benefit from his able leadership on this issue. I will conclude with one general observation. As we all know, we are operating in a time of budgetary stringency. Each part of the Government must bear its share of budget cuts. That includes the Department of State and the USIA. This necessity is reflected in S. 1281. The Foreign Relations Committee cut roughly $500 million out of the administration's request of $6.4 billion for the Department of State, USIA, and the Board for International Broadcasting. I supported that cut, but with some reluctance. I am concerned that if this cutting trend continues, our Nation's long-term security interests will be undercut. In my view, prudent spending on the Department and its related agencies is a tremendously cost-effective way to promote the well-being of our Nation and its citizens. Indeed, although it may not be realistic in the near time, I hope that at some point we will be able to increase our support for the Department of State and our other foreign policy agencies. President, to conclude I want to thank the majority leader and the Republican leader for their assistance in bringing this important piece of legislation to the floor. I also want to thank the ranking member on the committee, Senator Helms, the chairman of the Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations, Senator Kerry, and the ranking member on the subcommittee, Senator Pressler, for their fine work in helping to get S. 1281 reported from the committee and up onto the Senate floor. I now turn to my colleague from North Carolina for his opening statement.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Chair recognizes the Senator from North Carolina [Helms].
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I thank the Chair. I, of course, thank my friend, the distinguished chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations. It has always been a pleasure to work with him. He and I have managed a number of bills in the years that we have been here. He has been here longer than I have, and he has managed more bills. But I have to say, President, that none of the pieces of legislation with which I have dealt in my 21 years in the Senate have met with the cooperation and the effective working together by all Senators and all staff members to produce this bill that we call the Foreign Relations Authorization Act for fiscal years 1994 and 1995. The short form on that is, of course, the State Department authorization bill. I say to my friend from Rhode Island, it is a pleasure to work with him always. President, every committee has to make some tough choices in an effort to save the taxpayers money at a time when this Congress has run up a total of nearly $4.5 trillion in debt. I am pleased that the Foreign Relations Committee did an adequate job in connection with this bill in that respect. In committee, I offered an 8.5 percent budget reduction amendment designed to require the State Department to review its organizational and operational requirements seriously. You know how bureaucrats in this town operate. They hear a mandate or presumed mandate of Congress and then they go about doing what they want to do instead of what Congress has asked them to do. My amendment, as perfected by Senator Kerry and Senator Pressler, cut the administration's fiscal year 1994 request by $504 million, out of a $6.4 billion request. It cut it down to about $5.9 billion in terms of an authorization bill. And it reduced the administration's fiscal year 1995 budget authority by almost $450 million. That is a $950 million reduction over 2 years. As the saying goes, that is not exactly chopped liver. The authorized levels in this bill are $253 million below last year's actual level for the State Department, the USIA, and related agencies. S. 1281--this bill--also includes authorization for the Peace Corps at virtually no-growth levels in terms of expenditures. Ordinarily, the Peace Corps is authorized as a separate bill or included in the foreign aid authorization bill. It is a little bit different this year. In addition to the budget reduction, there are some positive legislative provisions in this bill. For the first time, this bill caps--puts a cap on--the end strength of the Foreign Service officers who can be hired. I intend to offer a technical amendment giving the Secretary of State authority to RIF-- that means reduction in force--the Foreign Service office employees if he finds it necessary to do so. The bill eliminates Foreign Service performance pay. It ensures adherence to statutory pay ceilings so that nobody can make more than the Secretary of State. And it provides mandatory reassignment or retirement of Presidential appointees within 90 days. I am going to seek to eliminate the ``hall walkers'' at the State Department, that is to say, those Foreign Service employees who refuse to accept new assignments to meet urgent personnel needs. If they are offered an assignment they do not want, they turn it down and they walk the corridors of the State Department still being paid by the taxpayers, and I think that is an outrage. I wish to stop that. The bill creates a capital investment fund, a much needed management tool, to encourage investment in information technologies to improve and modernize the State Department's functions. This bill promotes cost-effective property management techniques. It proposes to ensure that rewards may be provided for information about acts of terrorism, and it proposes to reduce the number of mandated reports, which nobody reads in the first place. The Foreign Relations Committee also agreed to direct the President of the United States to conduct a Government-wide review of all Government-sponsored international educational and cultural exchange programs. This year the American taxpayers will spend, or be forced to furnish more than $800 million in exchange programs managed by 22 different Federal agencies. That, too, is an outrage. These programs have been expanded and enlarged by 45 percent in just the past 3 years and have doubled since 1980. Nobody even knows how many programs there are. Nobody knows how much money is being spent. You try to get the information from anybody in this Government, and they say, ``Well, we don't know. We will look it up.'' And you never get a return telephone call. Now, President, the point is this. We cannot tolerate and the American taxpayers ought not to be required to finance such unbridled growth. I suggest that anybody who may doubt what I am saying should look at the figures. I cannot justify to my constituents--and no other Senator can really--the spending of almost $1 billion of the taxpayers' money to educate foreign students when we have such tight budget constraints here at home. So there are many, many things that we need to look at, and this bill addresses most of what I had in mind. The rest of them I am going to try to do by amendment. Now, title III authorizes the international broadcasting activities of VOA, RFE/RL, TV and Radio Marti, Radio Free Asia, and other broadcasting elements under the new International Broadcasting Bureau to be guided and directed by the Broadcasting Board of Governors. This kind of broadcasting effort has been fraught with great controversy, and I intend to listen carefully to the debate on all the provisions. My mind is pretty well made up, but I wish to hear both sides of the argument. In June of last year, the administration contended that the only way to save $250 million over the next 4 years was to consolidate VOA and RFE/RL. And today, January 1994, the administration contends that it can accede to the Senate--what do you know--and permit there to be true surrogate broadcasting, that is to say, keep RFE/RL and Radio Free Asia and still save $250 million. So you might say that saving $250 million in a budget like ours is not a giant step, but it is a step in the right direction. Either Duffey was wrong in June or he is wrong now, and I look forward to the debate on this issue. We will have friendly debate, and I hope that the Senate will carefully measure the information on both sides. Now, President, I do not think I have ever been more disappointed in the good-intentioned efforts announced at the beginning of this administration a year ago to restructure the State Department. Oh, I had bureaucrat after bureaucrat come up to see me saying, ``Senator, you are going to love this.'' And I did like what they were saying. But nothing happened. Nothing happened. The administration and Congress deserve a D minus on this matter. When the Foreign Relations Committee heard from Secretary-designate Christopher on January 13-14 last year, 1993, the Secretary-to-be said: ``We need to do more with less.'' I am sitting there applauding, saying, ``Praise the Lord.'' But subsequently, his Deputy Secretary, Cliff Wharton, and his Under Secretary for Management, Brian Atwood--two nice fellows--appeared before the committee and--I am quoting them exactly--they promised to ``streamline the bureaucracy, consolidate responsibilities, reduce personnel, and reinvigorate management.'' What happened? They were off in the stratosphere, wild blue yonder, or whatever you want to call it. Now, we heard the Secretary and Deputy Secretary announce with great fanfare a broad-based reorganization to, guess what, reduce excessive layering, that is, bureaucracy on top of bureaucracy on top of bureaucracy. The State Department would, according to the Secretary a year ago, ``do its fair share'' to participate in, guess what, ``reductions and cutbacks that President Clinton would impose on the entire Federal Government.'' Promises, promises. But I could not believe my ears when I heard all that good news a year ago. I remember pulling out my hearing aid to see if it was working right. I thought finally somebody had acknowledged that the State Department was a topheavy, bloated, inefficient bureaucracy in need of massive reorganization and reductions. No wonder I said, ``Glory, glory, hallelujah,'' because that had been something on my agenda for a long time, at least 21 years or more. But what happens? President, as we have seen in endless and countless instances over the years, the State Department's rhetoric far exceeded its actions. One year later Secretary Atwood with his good intentions to reorganize the State Department--and I have no doubt about his good intentions. I believe that he meant what he said a year ago. Anyway, Secretary Atwood is gone--promoted, I guess you might call it, to AID, the Agency for International Development, to tackle that behemoth of a mess. Dr. Wharton may be a good and decent man, praised for his organizational abilities a year ago to spend substantial efforts on reorganizing and restructuring the State Department. But to the dismay of a lot of us, we waited a much ``ballyhooed'' reorganization report which was delayed, rewritten, scrubbed, and never materialized beyond another document that was leaked to the press. A year later, here we are. We find Dr. Wharton in a caretaker status dismissed supposedly because of a lack of attention to policy matters. One of the only substantive records we have of the administration's reorganization effort is the administration request for a 33 percent increase in the number of Assistant Secretaries, from 18 to 24 in number, and an increase in the number of Executive Level IV positions in the State Department. President, what an incredible response to the promise last year to streamline the bureaucracy. Maybe all of this has been reported in the media, but I have not seen it. They are too busy with other things. Bureaucratic costs associated with such needless additional jobs, if you want to call them jobs, is astounding. The cost of the salaries for these 12 additional political appointee positions is more than $1.2 million a year--a small amount. It depends on where you are from. To the taxpayer down there in Chinquapin, NC, it is not a small amount of money, and I certainly do not think it is small. Every new bureau at the U.S. State Department will mean at least $2 million per year in additional costs, and support costs. You have to have secretaries, and you have to have all of the rest that goes with it--more people to sit around and say, ``Oh, I have to clip this fingernail before I do anything else.'' The administration request is antithetical I think to our purpose in being here today. President, in committee I offered an amendment to remove all statutory requirements for the creation of Assistant Secretaries. We have enough of them. They fall all over each other. The most important thing they do, most of them, in today's time, is arrange where they are going to have lunch. Over time Congress has mandated six such positions. And my amendment authorizes the Secretary of State to organize as may be necessary within the ceiling of 16 Assistant Secretaries. Lord knows that ought to be enough. It is the same number Christopher had when he was with the State Department in the Carter administration. The committee rejected my amendment, and further rejected the administration's request to repeal the six mandatory positions. But not a word of that was in the paper. Nobody on television mentioned it. The committee's majority told Secretary Christopher, ``We don't trust your promise to keep our favorite Assistant Secretary positions, but we will give you two more Assistant Secretary bureaucracies to grow on.'' That is what the committee did with the vote that defeated my proposal. The other body, the House of Representatives, did the administration one better. The House guys provided three new bureaucracies which is totally unacceptable. And during consideration of this bill I intend to offer an amendment and have the Senate vote on it to rectify the Foreign Relations Committee's judgment on this matter, and thereby prevent the further bloating of the Federal bureaucracy. I do hope that Senators will support that. One other area that deserves our closest attention is the funding level reporting requirements and approval for U.S. participation in the United Nations and other international organizations. Sometimes, President, I wonder if the U.S. Government has the slightest idea what goes on in the United Nations and the other international organizations. The United States voted in the U.N. Economic and Social Council Organization to grant consultative status to self-proclaimed homosexual pedophiles. How about that? I do not recall anything in the Washington Post about that, or even in the Washington Times, as far as I know. This group, a known homosexual pedophile organization, was elevated to consultative status by the United Nations and the State Department as well. What is new? I intend to offer an amendment to correct this grotesque embarrassment to the United States, and particularly the people back home. But we tried to encourage reform in the U.N. budget process and mandate timely reports to Congress when this administration uses U.S. funds for international peacekeeping activities. My intent is, as a manager of this bill, to strongly support Senator Dole and Senator Pressler when they offer major amendments to restructure the U.S. participation in the U.N.-sponsored activities and require withholding of U.N. assessments until an inspector general is appointed at the United Nations. President, Somalia, Bosnia, and Haiti are all disasters, every one of them, disasters that must not be repeated. The answer is not in rewriting the War Powers Resolution. Forget that. The answer is better decisionmaking, a much closer scrutiny of U.N. actions, and a more thoughtful understanding of the practical consequences of pursuing a policy of what they call aggressive multilateralism. The same people who throughout the 1980's wanted to blame America first have now written a new draft of a Presidential decision, Directive PD-13, that is intended, and I quote, ``sacrifice Americans first.'' This new invented game of surrender your sovereignty is to be played out in the United Nations by the nonelected officials committing the U.S. Treasury and the troops of the United States to U.N. objectives without congressional approval. They just go ahead and do what they want to do. I do not know about other Senators. But this Senator says no, not with my vote would it happen. In some respects, the authorized levels for the U.N. peacekeeping operations in this bill are nothing short of disingenuous. The Department of State, the U.S. Mission of the United Nations and OMB have known for just about a year now that U.S. peacekeeping assessments in 1994 will be $1 billion more than Congress has authorized and appropriated, and there will be $1 billion more than authorized for next year, fiscal year 1995. In fact, the U.S. State Department has already spent all of the fiscal year 1994 funds that were appropriated, and we are only 3 months into the fiscal year. As they say in North Carolina, ``How do you like them apples?'' If the American people had a vote on it, we would find out pretty quickly. This administration continues to write the United Nations blank checks every time we vote in the U.N. Security Council to approve another peacekeeping mission. Thus far, the State Department has been sucking hundreds of millions of dollars from the Department of Defense every year to support U.N. peacekeeping operations. President, the money is drying up. We the people--and I consider myself one of the people--of the United States populace have spent in excess of $2 billion in Somalia, over $800 million in direct support to the U.N. mission. And when the United States pulls out, watch it; the United Nations is going to send the American taxpayers a bill for over $500 million more to pay the 31.7 percent assessed cost for U.N. peacekeeping in Somalia. How dumb can we get? This cannot continue, and it must not continue, and will not continue after Senator Dole's amendment, of which I am a cosponsor, is enacted. It is an amendment to the U.N. Participation Act. Again, I hope all Senators and their staffs will take note of the Dole amendment and what it means and stands for and what it calls for. There is one provision in this bill that every Senator should know something about. Senators should familiarize themselves with the dangerous impact of section 170(a) relating to the creation of an international criminal court. I remember Sam Ervin sitting over there warning us about this. He was disturbed about the so-called genocide treaty, and I tried to pick up when he departed and do the best I could. We finally defanged the genocide treaty so that it amounted to nothing. But here they go again. Efforts to establish such an international criminal court drives right to the core of our basic constitutional liberties and guarantees. But you will not read that in the press. They will say, ``What is that fellow talking about?'' If they say anything at all. Well, the constitutional lawyers know what I am talking about, and you watched Sam Ervin talk about it. This court, President, has the potential of sitting in judgment of American citizens, U.S. corporations, the U.S. Government, and, yes, even the legislative acts of Members of Congress. So it does matter. It does need and deserve and cry out for consideration of the implications of such a court. This provision should not be included in this bill in any shape, fashion, or form--not one. I wish Sam Ervin were back here. The committee reported a freestanding resolution some months ago to find its way to the other committees' jurisdictions. I hope the Senate anticipates that the Senate Judiciary Committee will conduct a thorough, careful review of the impact that this proposal threatens to our constitutional prerogatives. We will ignore this issue at our own peril, and worse, at the peril of the governance of the American people. The Armed Services Committee may wish to explore the legal advisers' concerns that the draft of the international criminal court statute pending before the sixth committee of the United Nations could impact in an extremely negative way upon ``the status of forces' agreements or the prosecution of war crimes.'' These are not just words, they have meaning and they have implications, a constitutional question. The Finance and Energy and Commerce Committees may be interested in the potentially devastating impact that this proposal may have on the cost to U.S. companies doing business overseas. The jurisdictional authority of such a court is expansive and its impact is unknown. We are flying blind by the seat of our britches. It should be excluded from this bill. It is totally unwise. It is dangerous to act precipitously on this provision, and I hope that my efforts to strike this provision will be supported by a majority of the Senate. I hope the public will require their Senators to explain why they oppose it or not. President, before I conclude, I feel obliged to comment briefly on two amendments that I intend to offer, designed to assist U.S. citizens who have had their property confiscated--that is to say illegally stolen--by foreign governments receiving foreign aid from the taxpayers of the United States. The Senate passed one of these amendments 96 to 4. I stood down there during the vote and Senators came in and said, ``good amendment'' and all of the rest of it. The State Department, however, and other U.S. officials turned a deaf ear to U.S. citizens whose property had been unlawfully taken from them. Unfortunately, the Senate must again send a wakeup call to the U.S. State Department. That message must go to the countries abusing the rights of U.S. citizens, and those countries ought to be denied even one dime of foreign aid money until they cut this out. In closing, I reiterate my appreciation to Senator Pell and Senator Kerry and Senator Pressler and their respective staffs for their stewardship in guiding this legislation through subcommittee and to floor debate. I say again, as I have said so many times publicly, I am most grateful for the consideration and cooperation of Claiborne Pell for his efforts to accommodate the concerns of Senators on this side of the aisle. I do hope we can move this legislation on to conference in an expeditious fashion. That concludes my statement, President, and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Wellstone). The Senator from Massachusetts, Kerry, is recognized.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, first of all, I thank the distinguished Senator from Rhode Island, Senator Pell, the chairman of the committee, both for his summary of the bill today, but more particularly for his assistance and trust in the process as we have moved along here, and for his leadership of the committee. I also thank the distinguished Senator from North Carolina. He and I have worked together all of the time I have been here, going way back to the initial efforts we made on the Philippines and other areas, and I have enjoyed that collaboration. We disagree sometimes, but we have never found any disagreeableness in our disagreeing. I look forward to working with him in continuing to move this particular bill through the process. I might point out to colleagues that this bill was reported unanimously by the committee. It reflected a lot of consensus work in the early stages, bringing together, first, the subcommittee and then, subsequently, the full committee. The 19-to-0 vote by which the full committee reported it to the floor reflects that, despite the fact that there are today, as there always are, issues that the ranking member of the full committee disagrees with or other members may disagree with, we have basically put together an important statement on the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee's attitude about the agencies that are involved here--the State Department, the U.S. Information Agency, the Peace Corps, and the broadcasting entities. I think this reflects a well-formulated, strongly supported approach to those issues. The bill authorizes almost $6 billion, and I will not go into all of the breakdowns. I do not think it is necessary. I think the chairman has adequately pointed out what is basically covered in the bill. But I do want to underscore the fact that this reflects real cuts during difficult times. This bill--and I think the reason for the bipartisan support for it--represents a serious effort by the committee to bring to the floor something that really reflected a real effort to be responsible in the field of foreign policy about the expenses of this country at a time when everybody is trying to pay a price in restraining the cost of government. So I think we have demonstrated our serious approach in this bill. The 1994 authorization for the State Department, the USIA, and broadcasting entities represents, as the Senator from North Carolina said, a half billion dollars of real reductions. And that is, when you look at the total budget of $6 billion, a very significant cut. It is underscored by the fact that the President's request to us, which we went under, was already at a freeze level for 1993. The committee achieved the cuts that we made by reducing the State Department budget by some $333 million and the USIA budget by about $179.5 million. I might also point out that the authorization levels in this bill for fiscal year 1995 are a straight line of the 1994 levels in the bill, so there is not a large outyear increase or some hidden amount of money on the back end of this bill. This bill will require the State Department to make reductions, and we have specified where some of those reductions ought to be. The Senator from North Carolina has raised the issue of the United Nations. We will undoubtedly debate that at some point in the course of this legislative effort. But I would just like to point out very quickly that we considered restraints on the expenditures pending certain reforms within the United Nations. I have joined with the Senator from South Dakota, Senator Pressler, in I think a serious message to the United Nations. The entire committee has been very clear that we are not sanguine about the rate of change or the implementation of an Inspector General process, and so forth. But we did, a majority of the members of the committee, come to the conclusion that it is not serving the best interests of the United States at this juncture to place a formal restraint on the expenditure of our moneys to the United Nations because of the fact that we have spent a large part of the last decade at war with the process of withholding money, and indeed creating an awfully lot of a credibility gap between our intentions and desires at the United Nations and our position here in Washington. We think we are on the right course. The Ambassador to the United Nations has testified before the committee. We think we are achieving a certain amount of the reform that we need, and we are not convinced that there is a need to move forward on any further restraints at this time. I might simply add, before opening the bill up to amendment, that this is basically a nuts-and-bolts bill that faces questions of the administration and management and organizational needs of the agencies involved of our foreign policy sector. The bill implements key aspects of the administration's reorganization plan for the State Department, including the creation of a fifth Under Secretary position for global affairs, as well as revisions in structure and duties of various bureaus. The bill does mandate a reduction in the size of the senior Foreign Service, and I think that is very important. My colleague from North Carolina points out that there are a couple of additional Assistant Secretary positions. Indeed, there are, and I have just articulated a fifth Under Secretary position. The reason for this is that we are living in a very different world today, with enormous demands on the upper level decisionmaking of the State Department. So we have done a tradeoff. We have permitted the Secretary to organize at the upper level in a way that streamlines decisionmaking, that augments the ability of the Department to face up to larger responsibilities and more diverse, complex responsibilities in the world, while simultaneously mandating reductions in so-called bureaucracy. And so I think we are serving some of the complaints of the Senator from North Carolina, and I think we are being responsible. We have also prohibited performance pay awards for both fiscal years of 1994 and 1995. We have mandated an annual report on the financial aspects of the United Nations peacekeeping operations. Now, a final comment I would make is that this bill incorporates, with a few modifications, the administration's plan to consolidate the international broadcasting activities of the U.S. Information Agency and the Board for International Broadcasting. As colleagues know, we have spent a lot of money over the years, and I think to great success, in bringing information to people behind the former Iron Curtain and in helping people who live in totalitarian countries to learn something both about democracy and our world, as well as about the reality of what is happening in their world. And that is a very important function. With the fall of the Berlin Wall, with the emerging, hopefully sustained, democratic states of Eastern Europe, those demands have changed, and it is simply not sensible for the United States to be spending the kind of money or to be supporting the kind of overhead and bureaucracy in order to achieve those goals. The goals have not departed. As my colleagues, Senator Feingold and Senator Biden, will discuss no doubt, the goals are still very real. We want to guarantee the integrity of the broadcasting capacity of the United States, while simultaneously maximizing our ability to be able to restrain the costs and overhead. I think, thanks to the good efforts of the Senator from Wisconsin, Senator Feingold, and the Senator from Delaware, Senator Biden, who have cooperated together with the administration and Joe Duffey of USIA, we now have the compromise that preserves integrity and independence, while simultaneously permitting consolidation to take place. I would thank both of those Senators for their significant contributions to this legislation and, frankly, for having brought the process to a head and created the dynamics which have brought us to the point of having, I think, a very significant reduction. We are saving some $240 million on this broadcasting effort in real money in the short term. I suggest that that represents an intelligent and strong way of approaching the changes that we face in the international community. I might also add that I think there is a unanimity within the United States Senate--certainly within the Foreign Relations Committee, but almost within the Senate--on the value of exchange programs. We are consistently hearing the success stories of students who have come to this country from various parts of the world, learned something about America--pursued their studies here, learned something about democracy, the free world, the free enterprise system--and gone back to their countries as new practitioners of many of those ideals, or lived at least with their eyes open. There are many who feel this is perhaps one of the strongest things we can do in the market place of foreign ideas. Indeed, in keeping with that unanimity of approach, there is an addition, a small addition which is mostly symbolic--we would like to have done more but it is what we can do within the limits of the budget now--an increase of some $11 million for international exchanges. I add, this increase was offset by other cuts within our own budget in this bill. I think it does provide for important new scholarship programs, particularly in Southeast Asia, East Timor, and Cambodia-- among others. So, finally, I would echo the statement of the Senator from North Carolina. There really should not be a lot that is overly contentious here. We hope we will be able to move this bill, and I look forward to cooperating with colleagues in an effort to try to bring those amendments to the floor as rapidly as possible, and do so.
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Delaware is recognized.
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  President, let me begin by complimenting Senator Kerry, the floor manager of the authorization bill, along with the ranking member of the full committee, as well as the subject jurisdiction subcommittee. It is not always the most fun to handle this bill. But it is very, very important. And I want to compliment Senator Kerry on the skill with which he has dealt with the issues contained in this legislation, particularly with regard to a couple of the more contentious aspects of it. I am pleased today to join my colleagues, the chairman of the full committee, Senator Pell, and the distinguished--and a Senator who is not only bright but extremely tenacious--the Senator from Wisconsin, [Feingold], in presenting a substitute amendment for title III of the bill. Amendment No. 1246 (Purpose: To provide for the consolidation of international broadcasting activities)
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  On behalf of myself, Senator Feingold, Senator Pell, and Senator Wofford, I send an amendment to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Delaware [Biden], for himself, Feingold, Wofford, Pell, Kerry, and Helms, proposes an amendment numbered 1246.
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. (The text of the amendment is printed in today's Record under ``Amendments Submitted.'')
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  President, the amendment I sent to the desk is a product of a compromise, a genuine hard-fought compromise, after months of deliberation and debate, not only in the Foreign Relations Committee but also within the executive branch and between the two branches. The debate has been arduous. It has not always been harmonious. But we have found a way forward that I believe all interested parties can agree on. This proposal literally reinvents an important instrumentality of U.S. foreign policy: International broadcasting. When I say ``reinvent,'' I mean that literally. We are fundamentally changing the way in which we organize our international broadcasting. Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, the Voice of America, and soon-to- be-established Radio Free Asia are not merely the names of radio services for millions of listeners around the globe. For those people, they represent a lifeline of news and information about their own countries and about the United States. I will not take the time of the Presiding Officer or my colleagues on the floor today to recite numerous examples where Central and Eastern European leaders who were behind the Iron Curtain as the curtain fell and the Berlin Wall came down credited--literally credited--Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty and other broadcasting services with playing a major role in bringing an end to the Soviet domination of Eastern and Central Europe. They have a very, very proud past. Last summer, President Clinton--coming to office committed to the notion of reinventing Government and saving taxpayers' money and consolidating where that can be done--proposed an ambitious plan to consolidate these services; that is, all the radios under one roof, merging the administrative and technical staffs of the radios under an umbrella of the U.S. Information Agency. And I might say that a new and young Senator from Wisconsin, who campaigned on the same principles of cutting costs and waste in Government, came to this Senate and to the Foreign Relations Committee and was truly the engine behind which this entire process was pulled through the Senate. I must say very bluntly that I have never stated as strongly my firmly held conviction about how something should turn out as it relates to legislation. But I cannot, nor do I, claim credit for the savings that appear in this bill. The savings are a consequence of the initiative of the President of the United States and the Senator from Wisconsin, with the able leadership of the Senator from Massachusetts. I support the savings, but it was the Senator from Wisconsin who drove us toward these savings. So I want to be clear about that. I want to give credit where it belongs. It belongs with the chairman of the subcommittee, Senator Kerry, and the Senator from Wisconsin, who has been absolutely, as I said, relentless on this issue, to the credit of the people of his State and the country. Finally, credit belongs to the President of the United States. The President's plan is a farsighted proposal that preserves the best elements of the various radio services, and achieves important savings by consolidating the administrative and technical staffs where appropriate. This transformation will provide a firm foundation for the long-term post-cold-war effort to promote democracy and U.S. interests around the world. I might add, by the way, I, and I suspect my friend from Wisconsin and others, and my friend from North Carolina--whom I might also thank for weighing in on the same side of this issue as the Senator from Delaware when we had to work out a compromise here--would all state that there is as much need for the radios today as there was before the Berlin Wall came down. It is not the case that all of a sudden, as the Berlin Wall came down and the cold war has dissolved, that peace and tranquility reign and democracy is the watchword around the world. This is a case, for the next decade at least, where the Central and Eastern European countries will struggle, along with the former Soviet Union and the only gigantic totalitarian regime left in the world--that is, China--until their people enjoy access to information and a free and independent media. It is as important today as it was in 1948 or 1955 or 1967. Equally important, the plan will achieve cost savings of over $250 million over the next 4 years, and more, depending how you calculate this, over the next 10-year period. For all these months, the participants in this debate have been divided only about the details of the proposal. Never once did we disagree about the basic framework of the consolidation or the cost savings that had to be met. What divided us was the organizational question, one that I believe is critical to the independence of Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and the newly established Radio Free Asia, which is established by this legislation. We have now resolved this issue to the satisfaction of all the interested parties, and I want to take a moment now to summarize the agreement as I see it. The overall purpose of the provision is the same as the original committee bill: To consolidate the international broadcasting services of the U.S. Government for the purpose of saving money and eliminating duplication. This amendment differs from the committee bill only insofar as it permits the so-called surrogate radios, meaning Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Asia, to be established as ``grantees''--a term of art--of the U.S. Government, supported by Federal dollars but operationally independent of the Government. I believe, as my colleagues have come to learn, I think to their surprise, how strongly I believe in the notion of what I believe to be the credibility and independence of these radios, for that has been the reason for their effectiveness for over four decades. Under the committee bill, the broadcasters of RFE/RL and the new Radio Free Asia would have become direct employees of the United States Government, leading to the creation of a heretofore unknown breed, a ``U.S. Government journalist.'' I ``ain't'' never heard of such a thing as a ``U.S. Government journalist.'' I think if one were teaching a high school course and you wanted a definition of an oxymoron, you would say ``U.S. Government journalist.'' It was a staple of the cold war that Americans mocked countries that deployed journalists in the employ of the governments. It would have been nice but an unpleasant irony were we to mark the end of the cold war by adopting this practice ourselves. Had we done so, the radios would have had neither the appearance nor the reality of journalistic independence. I might add, I do not think many of my colleagues felt as strongly as I did that, in fact, the provision under the original legislation would have done that, but that was my view. This amendment contains another important provision: The budget ceilings on the amount to be expended by RFE and RL and Radio Free Asia; a study of the effectiveness of Radio Free Asia after 3 years; and a sunset provision requiring a reauthorization of Radio Free Asia by the end of the decade. I would note parenthetically that I have long supported the concept of sunsetting--I introduced legislation in 1974 when I was a young Senator on this subject and I still think the principle holds true, as strongly as I feel the need for Radio Free Asia. I think we should look at it at the end of the decade and see whether or not it is still needed. Third, numerous provisions to strengthen the oversight by Congress and the executive branch to ensure that the radios are operating consistent with U.S. foreign policy objectives and within budgetary constraints. My distinguished friend from Wisconsin, I am sure, will point out to us, as he should, some of the outrageous spending practices that did take place over the past several decades, and this will bring this to an end. At this point, I would like to express my appreciation to the administration, particularly to Joseph Duffey, Director of the USIA and an old friend for 20 years now, and our former colleague, Congressman Dan Mica, now chairman of the Board for International Broadcasting, with whom we have worked closely. Both men came to see me more times than they probably care to remember. I would also like to thank the chairman and ranking member of the committee, Senator Pell and Senator Helms, as well as the chairman and ranking member of the subcommittee, Senator Kerry and Senator Pressler. Finally, Senator Feingold, who joined our committee last year and jumped in with both feet on this broadcasting issue, to his great credit. We started out on opposite sides of the fence, but we now have a meeting of the minds. My hat is off to him for his persistence, his insight, and for his insistence on the amount of money being saved the American taxpayer. President, the proposal before the Senate represents what I believe to be--and I think few would argue with it--a carefully crafted compromise that balances two important interests: Maintaining effective international broadcasting, as well as independence, and ensuring fiscal responsibility. I strongly urge my colleagues to support this amendment, and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Wisconsin is recognized. Privilege of the Floor
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that Bob Gerber, a congressional fellow in my office, be granted privilege of the floor during consideration of S. 1281 and all rollcall votes thereto.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, I rise to speak as one of the principal cosponsors of the amendment being offered to consolidate and update U.S. overseas broadcasting operations. Let me begin by offering my thanks and gratitude to the chairman of the subcommittee, Senator John Kerry, who was enormously helpful to me in understanding all the intricacies of the overseas broadcasting system and to get this matter through committee. Of course, also to the Senator from Delaware. I appreciate his kind words. It was my first good, tough year-long battle as a Senator. I enjoyed it, and I think we have come up with something that does actually meet the deficit reduction goals and also, at the same time, shows some consideration for the journalistic independence issue that he obviously identified many years ago as something that was very important for the people of Eastern Europe to achieve freedom. This consolidation has been a long time in the making and is the culmination of many discussions. I have been an active player in the debates since a year ago January when I introduced my first bill in the U.S. Senate, Senate bill 51. The Overseas Consolidation and Deficit Reduction Act was intended to reduce Federal expenditures for overseas broadcasting. The whole purpose in introducing it was to reduce the Federal deficit. I had no particular animus or concern about Radio Free Europe or Radio Liberty or anything that had been done with those organizations. It just appeared that it was time, given our deficit, to cut back. That remains the primary reason why I think we ought to do this amendment today. But I must say, President, that as I investigated the issue further and after I had introduced the bill, I found something that troubled me a little bit more. I found extensive fiscal abuses in the current system which also demanded reform. The legislation that we hopefully will adopt today or sometime this week will not only achieve deficit reduction but will also address some of these concerns about abuses that have occurred with regard to the Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty operation in Munich. President, Senate bill 51 was based upon proposals made by the Congressional Budget Office which estimated that the changes that we were going to make would save roughly $1 billion over 5 years, a solid step toward reducing the Federal deficit and toward restructuring our foreign policy tools in the post-cold war era. It was very helpful when the President gave his State of the Union Address last year and focused on the economy and focused on the budget and the deficit. In his 150 proposed cuts, he included the issue of combining, consolidating overseas broadcasting and, in particular, the two surrogate radio services, RFE and RL. President, RFE and RL were established more than 40 years ago as a covert operation by the CIA that, in addition to the VOA, was to broadcast behind the Iron Curtain. All three of these entities--RFE, RL, and VOA--played a tremendous role in bringing news and information to people in Communist countries. I certainly would be one of the first ones to say they did help set in motion the forces that brought an end to the cold war. But it is very difficult today in 1994 to justify the American taxpayers continuing to spend literally over $200 million a year to operate these radio services in Europe in addition to the VOA, and then to throw on top of that another $2 million for the administrative costs of maintaining the Board for International Broadasting, an agency whose sole function has been to administer funding for these radio services. It is a task they have not done in a very effective manner. The administration's original budget proposal assumed deficit savings of $263 million over the next 4 years. The President's February proposal, however, created a deep controversy in foreign policy circles. By June, the administration had restructured its proposal for the consolidation of overseas broadcasting. To oversee all the broadcasting functions, USIA was to create a Broadcasting Board of Governors which would allocate resources to four broadcasting bureaus. RFE and RL and Radio Free Asia were to be included as programs within this new office of surrogate broadcasting. This would have meant private grantee status would have been abolished. The administration contended the same savings in January would have been achieved; that is, the $263 million. Recognizing even though this was not exactly the bill I had introduced, that these were real savings, I became one of the leading proponents of the new plan, although my insistence has been, and the insistence of the Senator from Massachusetts has been that the savings be locked into law by placing a 4-year ceiling on spending for international broadcasting. When the Senate Foreign Relations Committee marked up the bill in July, we did adopt the administration's position by a strong 15-to-4 vote. However, as the Senator from Delaware has indicated, he had grave reservations about the so-called federalization of RFE, RL, and Radio Free Asia. While I believe that continuing private status for RFE/RL and creation of a private RFA would cut into political savings, Senator Biden was most concerned about the issue of journalistic independence which he talked about. After months of discussion, the administration again changed its position and recently announced that it now supports continuing grantee status for these radio services and the creation of a private grantee status for Radio Free Asia. The grants would still be made by the so- called BBG which would also serve as the board for the private entities. The administration however--and this is the important item for me--indicated it would support several very important conditions relating to fiscal constraints. In the past month Senator Biden and I have been working together to develop an amendment which addresses each of our concerns. President, one of the reasons I believe the Senator from Delaware and I were able to reach an agreement regarding this amendment is that we have had different priorities. As he said, the Senator from Delaware has repeatedly demonstrated his commitment to the concept of journalistic independence as being critical to the functioning of the radios and stated that very forcefully. I want to say here because this issue can obviously come back over the over the years, I have some difficulty appreciating that argument about the independence. First, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty were established by the CIA, a fact that is widely known. Second, they have been funded by U.S. taxpayers since their inception, a fact that is also widely known. Third, the Board of Directors of the RFE/RL, Inc., is required, by law, to consist solely of individuals appointed by the President of the United States. These individuals also serve as members of the Board for International Broadcasting. Under the new legislation, this interlocking Board of Directors will continue, with the Broadcasting Board of Governors appointed by the President of the United States serving as the Board of Directors of RFE/RL, Incorporated. Fourth, each year, Congress debates and appropriates funds for the operation of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty and a number of congressional committees as well as the General Accounting Office conduct oversight of their activities on a regular basis. Fifth, the rest of the world views these Radios as belonging to the United States. Earlier this month, when the President of the United States was in Prague, the Government of the Czech Republic offered to President Clinton, not to some private organization, facilities within Prague to house the headquarters of RFE/RL, underscoring the fact that the entire world recognizing that these Radios are funded by the United States and operate under the policy directives of the Government of the United States. That will be true with respect to the new Radio Free Asia which President Clinton has asked be established under the same grantee status. The Governments of Asia, including China, view this new entity as an instrument of United States foreign policy. It is being established by the Government of the United States, it will be funded by the United States, and it is being, and will be used, by the United States to achieve certain foreign policy goals. The fact that we are debating its creation on the floor of the United States Senate before the entire world makes that inevitable. Nevertheless, I recognize that the Senator from Delaware believes that the current structure provides for at least the fiction of independence and that is important to supporters of the surrogate broadcasting. My concern in this area from the beginning has been quite different and unrelated to the issue of journalistic independence. My interest is in deficit reduction, eliminating duplication and waste and curbing the kinds of fiscal abuses that have plagued this program, not just in the past few years, but apparently from the inception of this program under the auspices of the CIA. As I will describe in a little bit of detail in a few moments, the fiscal abuses by the management of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty are not new. The record stretches back over 20 years. During my research into these issues, I found headlines in the New York Times, and statements in the Senate, dating back to 1976 decrying the lavish spending and salaries provided to RFE/RL employees. The reports by the General Accounting Office over the past two decades have documented over and over problems with the management and fiscal controls over Federal funds by RFE/RL. The amendment that we are offering today contains approximately 20 different fiscal restrictions that we have proposed, aimed at finally bringing this program under control. I intend to describe briefly some of these restrictions and the abuses which generated my concern because it is important that the Members of the Senate and the public have a clear picture regarding the fiscal problems in this program. Now, I know the time of the Senate is precious, and I know that the supporters of the Radios hope that because an agreement had been reached, I would not make a lengthy statement which might tarnish the reputations of the Radios. I believe, however, that this is an issue that has to be publicly discussed. As I have indicated before, many of these problems are not new. Excessive salaries and compensation for the higher level executives have been challenged in the past. Earlier this year, when I released a chart showing really the outrageous compensation and benefit packages provided to the top 15 executives, the biggest uproar apparently came from the RFE/RL headquarters in Munich where the employees for the first time learned what kind of benefits their top executives had been providing for themselves. Suppressing this kind of information does not serve the interests of the Radios, or the interests of open Government, or the interests of the Federal taxpayers who are paying the bills for this program. The information I have gathered during the past year about the fiscal abuses represents apparently only the tip of the iceberg. I have been informed that the compensation and benefit data I released last June did not include the special benefits provided to the top executives since that time, and I have learned a great deal more about these special benefits, particularly the benefits provided to Eugene Pell, who served as the president to RFE/RL, Inc. for a decade. President, I will begin addressing fiscal constraints contained in the amendment by talking about the one that is probably the most egregious, and that is the excessive compensation and benefits provided to RFE/RL employees. President, the amendment contains three provisions relating to salaries and compensation payable to employees of the grantees. First, it places a limit on salary and other compensation which can be paid to employees funded by these grants. These employees cannot be provided salary or other compensation which exceeds that payable to Federal employees under title V and title XXII of the United States Code. Second, it contains a definition of salary and compensation which makes it clear that we intend to cover a range of fringe benefits and special benefits provided to RFE/RL employees. In the past, it appears that the management of the Radios have used a variety of techniques to provide additional compensation beyond basic salaries. The amendment makes it clear that this practice cannot continue and that employees of these grantees cannot receive benefits in excess of those available to regular Federal employees. Third, it requires a review of the system of job classification by the Office of Personnel Management to determine if there are disparities in terms of classifications used by RFE/RL compared to those employed by the Voice of America. Earlier this year, the Office of Management and Budget prepared an analysis of the salary costs of VOA employees and RFE/RL employees which found that RFE/RL employees are paid significantly higher than VOA employees performing comparable functions. For example, OMB found that the average annual salary and benefits for VOA employees in one representative Eastern European language service was approximately $54,000 compared to $89,000 for the same RFE language service. I also asked GAO to provide me with an analysis of the disparities in compensation provided to RFE/RL employees in contrast to VOA employees. I ask unanimous consent that a chart containing this information be printed in the Record. As this chart demonstrates, in virtually every category and level, RFE/RL provides benefits and compensation for its employees at levels that significantly exceed the benefits and compensation provided to VOA employees at comparable levels. For example, at the GS-9 level, GAO found that RFE/RL employees were receiving an average of $13,000 more than VOA employees. At the GS-12 level, the difference was close to $15,000; At the GM-15 level, the difference grows to $31,000; At the SES-4 level, the difference is $44,000. So, President, I ask now unanimous consent that a chart containing this information be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the chart was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: COMPARISON OF SELECTED RFE/RL AND VOA SALARIES AND BENEFITS [Based on single employee with no dependents] ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Entity RFE/RL VOA RFE/RL VOA RFE/RL VOA RFE/RL VOA ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Grade................................... GS 9 GS 9 GS 12 GS 12 GM 15 GM 15 SES 4 SES 4. Hours worked............................ 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40. Salary\1\............................... $45,759 $30,567 $63,159 $44,327 $77,559 $73,269 $107,300 $107,300. Annual leave............................ 26-30 days 12-26 days 26-30 days 12-26 days 26-30 days 12-26 days 26-30 days 12-26 days. Post allowance.......................... None $1,560 None $1,820 $27,146 $2,500 $37,500 $3,000. Housing allowance....................... $7,920 $15,400 $9,324 $17,900 $16,776 $17,800 $24,216 $17,800. Benefits\2\............................. $8,861 $3,499 $9,627 $5,073 $11,663 $7,416 $12,708 $9,205. Pension................................. $6,406 $4,860 $8,842 $7,048 $10,858 $11,649 $15,022 $17,061. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Total............................. $68,946 $55,886 $90,952 $76,068 $144,002 $112,634 $198,801 $154,366. Difference.............................. $13,060 $14,884 $31,368 $44,435. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ \1\RFE/RL has a tax protection plan for Executive employees at the SES 1-6 levels, located outside the United States. This plan compensates employees for the higher German taxes they incur as a result of living overseas. SES 5-6 level employees receive 100 percent compensation for the difference between their hypothetical German and United States income tax obligation. SES 1-4 level employees are compensated at 50 percent of the difference between their hypothetical German and United States tax obligation. The hypothetical taxes are then reconciled against actual taxes at the year's end. The dollar value of tax protection for the SES 4 position is not included in this table. \2\Benefits for both RFE/RL and VOA employees consist of health and life insurance. Social security costs are also included in this category.
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, the BAO data indicate that these disparities exist at every pay level, but what is readily apparent is that disparity becomes far greater at the highest levels. It is at the executive levels, and particularly, the compensation provided to the President, where the greatest problems arise. When the Senate Foreign Relations Committee met to consider this legislation, I released a chart based upon information I had obtained the night before the committee meeting which indicate that the top 15 executives at RFE/RL were receiving compensation and benefit packages that totaled $3.6 million, with an average salary and benefit package of over $240,000 per executive. I ask unanimous consent that a chart containing this information be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the chart was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: COMPENSATION--RFE/RL EXECUTIVE SERVICE ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Monthly tax Monthly Monthly protection Monthly Position and SES level base post payments--we housing Other Annual total-- salary allowance pay taxes allowance benefits rounded for them ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- President--6.......................... $9,641.67 $4,338.75 $6,651 $3,169 $31,236 $317,000 Exec. VP--6........................... 9,641.67 4,338.75 5,587 3,115 31,236 303,000 VP, finance, in D.C--5................ 9,316.67 N/A N/A N/A 30,180 142,000 VP, engineering--5.................... 9,316.67 4,192.50 5,421 3,163 30,180 195,000 RFE director--5....................... 9,316.67 4,192.50 7,313 3,167 30,180 318,000 RL director--5........................ 9,316.67 4,192.50 4,345 1,479 30,180 262,000 Res, inst. director--5................ 9,316.67 4,192.50 5,415 2,609 30,180 289,000 ISD director--3....................... 8,483.33 3,817.50 1,996 1,595 27,480 218,000 NCA director--3....................... 8,483.33 3,817.50 3,047 1,627 27,480 231,000 Personnel director--3................. 8,483.33 3,817.50 2,360 2,442 27,480 233,000 Corp. affairs in D.C--2............... 8,116.67 NA NA NA 26,292 124,000 RFE dep. director--2.................. 8,116.67 3,652.50 2,694 2,652 26,292 232,000 RI dep. director--2................... 8,116.67 3,652.50 2,307 2,532 26,292 225,000 Admin. director--2.................... 8,116.67 3,652.50 2,334 2,754 26,292 229,000 Int. auditor--1....................... 7,741.67 3,483.75 2,143 2,286 25,080 213,000 --------------- Annual Total for 15 people........ ......... 3,630,588 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  What I then learned subsequently, after already having the opportunity to reveal this information about the salaries, was that I really did not have all the information. In fact, the benefit packages may even be higher. That is certainly true with regard to the president of RFE/RL. GAO issued an opinion on September 9, 1993--and this is after our committee work--regarding the illegality of an additional benefit provided the president of the RFE/RL, and this benefit has been provided to him since 1985. In addition to the salary he received listed on this chart, Pell also received a yearly allowance of $15,000 which he was not required to account for and payments to a special supplemental retirement plan. GAO determined that the Federal Government has paid $126,000 into this special fund in Pell's behalf and that the total value of this supplemental retirement plan has risen to over $200,000 today. Again, the American taxpayers are paying for this outrageous compensation package. When Pell voluntarily resigned last fall, he was also paid $137,000 in severance benefits for what was a voluntary resignation. It was not even a termination. Both the BIB inspector general and GAO have determined that the payments to the special retirement plan were deferred compensation and actually violated the explicit provisions of the authorizing statute. Indeed, when the House Foreign Affairs Committee in 1983 placed a ceiling on the president's salary, in this case the RFE/RL president, they specifically pointed to an annuity plan established for Pell's predecessor as being a concern to the committee in terms of excessive compensation provided to the president of this organization. This is over 11 years ago. Nevertheless, President, the RFE/RL management used these 10 years to establish an even more generous plan for the president of RFE/ RL. Perhaps even more disturbing than the revelation of the additional $200,000 in special pension and the $137,000 in severance pay is the latest information, the latest wave of concern about this operation, and that information is contained in the most recent report of the inspector general. The report was dated October 21, 1993 regarding the other perks that the taxpayers have been providing the president of the RFE/RL. Regarding other personal perks that the taxpayers have been providing the president of the RFE/RL, we as Members of Congress know how concerned, upset or even violently angry constituents can become about perks that Congress has. I suggest people listen to these that are even more hidden than the ones that Congress has benefited from in the past. This report indicates that in addition to the salary and the benefits which I have already described, grant funds have been used to pay for a twice weekly maid service in Pell's personal residence amounting to $750 per month, and not only that, weekly gardening services amounting to $1,000 per month. That is on top of the lavish salary and the other benefits that the Federal taxpayers have been paying, $1,750 a month for maid and gardening services for Pell. President, I see no justification for these kinds of benefits being provided to any employee on top of a very generous salary. The amendment makes it clear that this type of payment is considered an additional compensation and must be included in the descriptions on salary and other benefits. I am sorry to say the report goes on and it identifies a number of other abuses. The report indicates that $237,000 in Federal dollars was spent over a 2-year period on fixing up and decorating two apartments for Pell. The inspector general's report provides details on this spending, including decorating costs that exceeded even RFE/RL policy for imported wallpaper, and a new kitchen with a solid oak floor that costs three times the allowable allowance for other RFE/RL executives. President, also purchased with Federal funds, four hand-woven Afghan rugs costing $6,230, and three brass lanterns imported from London, totaling $2,100, which he subsequently took with him when he resigned last fall and reimbursed the corporation only at 50 percent value. In addition, the report reveals that $25,000 of grant funds were used to rent a guest apartment for 14 months for the personal use of the RFE/RL president because his own apartment, which contained a piano room, a library, and a changing room, was allegedly too small to accommodate his personal guests. The inspector general, President, noted that the previous tenants of that apartment had included a larger family with two children. I assume that means more people rather than larger individuals. But it is clear that RFE/RL knew that this apartment was additional compensation being provided to their president because the inspector general report notes they reported the cost for the guest apartment to the German Government as taxable income of Pell, not an official expense of the corporation. Finally, and perhaps this is the smallest amount that will stick out in our minds, the inspector general's report notes that Pell also charged the United States taxpayers $100 to tune his piano after his move. President, I could continue reading into the Record quotes of the reports of the inspector general regarding the various abuses. It includes such things as unauthorized first-class travel for Pell and his spouse, but I believe it is unnecessary to continue with this already lengthy list of abuses. But I hope, President, that the picture now is very, very clear. This is an agency which has been milking the Federal taxpayers for decades for lavish salaries and benefits for top executives. It is very important to understand that this is not some new problem of RFE/RL that we assume they will fix up because we have had a chance to expose some of it. The lavish salaries and benefits did not begin with Pell's appointment in 1985. In 1976, GAO released a report noting that RFE/RL employees, which were funded almost 100 percent by U.S. taxpayers, were provided compensation and benefits in excess of that provided to other U.S. Government employees, including the Voice of America employees. When the details of the salaries provided to RFE/RL employees leaked to the news media, the New York Times ran a story headlined, ``2 U.S. Run Radios Chided on Salary: Report Finds Excessively High Pay Scale in Stations Beamed to Soviet Bloc.'' The article describes a letter written by former Senator John Pastore to the head of the Board for International Broadcasting, citing the GAO report, which described the RFE/RL salaries as shocking. At that time, RFE/RL employees in Munich were receiving an average salary and extra allowances which were approximately $15,000 above a comparable VOA employee in Munich. I ask unanimous consent that a copy of this article, dated July 2, 1976 be printed in the Record at the conclusion of my remarks.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. (See exhibit 1.)
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, the Senate majority leader at that time, Mike Mansfield, discussed this problem on the Senate floor on July 2, 1976, with Senator Pastore and they both agreed that RFE/RL needed to be brought under control. Senator Pastore stated: The abuse has reached the point of becoming almost scandalous: The salaries that are being paid; the fact that most of the employees are not Americans; that every time we say that we would like to either limit it, cut it down or move it we have almost an international diplomatic situation. It reminds me very much of what happened when we proposed some of these cuts earlier this year. In 1983, there was another attempt by Members of Congress to exert some control over the lavish salaries paid to RFE/RL employees. The House Foreign Affairs Committee in the 1983 reauthorization placed a ceiling on the salary that could be paid to the president of RFE/RL. The committee report described that provision as being necessary because of ``The substantial increase in salary and benefits granted to the President of the radios''. The report stated, ``At a time of severe budgetary constraints and personnel cutbacks the committee believes that RFE/RL, Inc., should also exercise restraint.'' President, what Senator Pastore said almost two decades ago on the Senate floor could be said in exactly the same terms today. It continues to be true that any attempt to rein in RFE/RL creates a virtual international diplomatic crisis. The slightest suggestion that funds could be reduced or that closer oversight should be imposed produces a chorus of outrage from the defenders of the radios. I frankly do not believe it is necessary for the U.S. taxpayers to pay these lavish salaries and benefits to the executives and employees of RFE/RL in order to accomplish the goals of these grants. President, this amendment makes it very clear that this misuse of Federal funds has to end now. I hope that the management and supporters of RFE/RL and the administration get the message we are trying to send: It is real simple. This is Federal money, taken from taxpayers who live in Wisconsin, Delaware, Massachusetts, North Carolina, and across this Nation--taxpayers who work hard every day and don't want to see their money going into lavish salaries, handwoven afghan rugs, or maid service for the executives who are running RFE/RL. If this raiding of the Federal Treasury for personal benefits does not end, this program will not survive. I hope that those who believe that RFE/RL continues to be essential--I think that is open to question--will work as hard as I will to clean up this mess and put an end to these abuses. President, I have discussed the $137,000 severance payment that was provided to the president of RFE/RL when he voluntarily resigned last fall. GAO has not ruled on the legality of that payment although the inspector general has raised questions about the severance payment as well as the pension program and $15,000 annual allowance provided to the president. The inspector general also previously reported on the unauthorized practice of RFE/RL making these payments to employees who voluntarily resign or retire. The March 1991 inspector general report concluded that the corporation's practice of paying severance benefits to these employees violated existing OMB regulations. The corporation agreed to change its policy for all new employees not covered by legal agreements. This language flatly prohibits them from entering into any new contracts or obligations for any such payments beyond the amount required by U.S. law or the law of the country where the employee resides. According to the inspector general report, these payments have grown in recent years and were being used by the corporation as an incentive to hire and retain employees. This is clearly another backdoor method of providing additional compensation and benefits to RFE/RL executives and employees that cannot continue. President, the amendment provides that the grantee may not enter into freelance contracts without the specific approval of the Director of the International Bureau for Broadcasting. This provision is designed to address yet another abuse that has persisted throughout RFE/RL's lifetime. In 1985, GAO issued a report on the freelance contracting practices at RFE/RL and found widespread abuses and lack of controls. In numerous cases, GAO found that RFE/RL entered into freelance contracts with its own full-time employees, in violation of general Federal agency prohibitions against such practices. The GAO audit found that RFE/RL managers were not required to demonstrate that their needs could not be otherwise met. In certain cases, RFE/RL employees were given contracts to perform work that was within the scope of their regular duties. There was little verification that the contract work was not being performed during the regular work day. The GAO report also noted that the radios had concealed their extensive use of freelance contractors in their budget justifications to OMB and Congress. Last July, the inspector general of BIB issued a report criticizing the freelance contracting practices of RFE/RL, and raised numerous questions about the inadequacy of the agency's control over the selection, use, and payment of freelancers. Repeatedly, in his semi-annual audit reports, the inspector general has cited specific cases of abuse, including hiring back retirees on a full-time basis through contracts, the size of payments made, and the lack of documentation of work performed. Nine years after the first GAO report focusing on this issue and after repeated reports from the inspector general, the abuse of freelance contracts has continued. Our amendment would attempt to put some restraints upon this practice by requiring specific approval by the Director of the Bureau for Broadcasting. Having these contracts approved by an outside individual will hopefully provide some restraint upon their misuse. Clearly, there are instances where it is necessary to have a freelance contractor perform work. But in the past, these contracts have been used for things like providing secretarial support and performing work within the scope of the employees own duties. The amendment also prohibits the use of grant funds for lobbying activities. In the past year, it is clear that a number of RFE/RL employees and executives have engaged in efforts to dissuade Congress from instituting any changes in the operations of RFE/RL. Obviously, they are free to lobby on their own time and at their own expense. The Federal taxpayers, however, should not have to foot the bill for this type of activity. One of the top executives whose lobbying efforts in Washington, DC have been fairly visible made five trips to Washington in a 6-month period during the last year, billing the taxpayers almost $10,000 for these trips. We do not allow other Federal grantees to use grant funds to pay for trips to Washington, DC to lobby Congress and this grantee should be subject to similar prohibitions. The rules for other programs are quite clear--grant funds cannot be used to support lobbying activities in any way or for developing grass roots campaigns to attempt to influence Congress. President, there are several conditions which are being placed upon the grant itself that I will describe together. First, the grant to RFE/RL is limited to $75 million beginning in fiscal year 1996. The current funding level is approximately $210 million. The corporation has already begun the necessary steps to bring its operations down to the level required to operate on an annual bases below $75 million and I congratulate them for taking these painful, but necessary steps. Under the plan, the number of RFE/RL employees will be reduced from the fiscal year 1993 level of approximately 1,600 to 900. In the past several months, termination notices have gone to several hundred employees in Munich and there appears to be a clear understanding that the size of this grant is being significantly reduced. These changes will require termination of certain language services and elimination of overlap and duplication with the Voice of America in certain areas. The legislation requires that the grant agreement contain the conditions which the Board determines are necessary to reduce overlap and duplication. It also requires that the grant agreement contain specific and detailed provisions relating to the purposes for which the grant funds will be expended and prohibitions against using the grant funds for other purposes without prior approval. Additionally, the legislation provides that the Board may terminate RFE/RL, Inc. as the grantee and award the grant to another entity if it determines that RFE/RL, Inc. is not carrying out the terms of the grant in a cost effective manner. This provision is intended to send a very strong signal that this is not an entitlement program; RFE/RL, Inc. can lose this grant if they continue to operate in the fiscal manner which I have outlined. In the past year, other proposals have been advanced to have the surrogate broadcasting provided through entities such as the Corporation for Public Broadcasting or the Voice of America. If RFE/RL, Inc. fails to meet the challenge to clean up its fiscal operations, another entity can be selected to carry out the grant activities. President, two issues are addressed in this legislation relating to the location of the activities of RFE/RL. First, the legislation requires that the senior administrative and managerial personnel be relocated within the geographic area of Washington, DC. For years, the General Accounting Office has been recommending that the headquarters of RFE/RL be moved to Washington, DC, a move which is feasible both from a technical and cost-effective perspective. Several years ago, the distinguished Senator from Ohio [Glenn], authored an amendment requiring RFE/RL to develop a plan for movement of portions of their activities to the United States in order to reduce the incredible high cost of operations in Munich. The RFE/RL management has strenuously resisted any such move. This legislation would mandate that a portion of the senior management do so immediately. Obviously, if this corporation is to assume responsibility for both the broadcasting activities in Europe and the former Soviet Union and Asia, it should be located in the United States. This provision does not require movement of the operational components of the radios, simply the top management. It requires a report to Congress within 90 days on the number of administrative, managerial, and technical personnel who will be relocated to the United States. My staff has already had informal discussions with GAO on the number of administrative and managerial personnel who could be relocated back to the United States and we will be working closely to monitor implementation of this provision. Second, the legislation requires a detailed plan be submitted to Congress and GAO regarding the proposed move from Munich to Prague. We need to know precisely the cost implications of this move. The legislation requires specific congressional approval before funds can be utilized to facilitate such a move. The amendment also requires certain management audits and reviews of the grantees activities. It requires that the inspector general's office in the U.S. Information Agency maintain a special unit to audit and monitor the activities of the grantee. The inspector general for the Board for International Broadcasting was established under the 1988 amendments to the Inspector General Act that created inspectors general at a number of small Federal agencies. Since the Inspector General at BIB began his reports on RFE/RL in 1989, he was provided invaluable oversight and information about the fiscal and management problems within the grantee. Under the proposed legislation, these functions would be assumed by the inspector general at USIA, who already has a broad area of responsibility for USIA activities. In order to assure that RFE/RL continues to be subjected to the same level of inspector general scrutiny that has taken place over the past 4 years, the legislation mandates the creation of a special unit to continue these activities after the consolidation. President, it is clear that BIB has provided little, if any, effective managerial oversight of the activities of RFE/RL in the past. hopefully, under the new structure, greater efforts will be made by the Bureau of Broadcasting to do some effective oversight and corrections of the management weaknesses in RFE/RL. It is unfortunate that we have been forced to rely solely upon the inspector general's office to bring to light the fiscal abuse that BIB's staff should have been monitoring and correcting. (
 
The speaker is MATHEWS and he says  assumed the Chair.)
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, I think it is also important to spend a moment or two on the issue of privatization. What happens at the end of this process? The Senator from Massachusetts and the Senator from Delaware have already talked about the significant dollar savings involved. If we get this done today, get it to the House and through conference, this could be a $1 billion savings item. My goal at end of this process, by 1999 is that we no longer have American taxpayers paying for any of this operation. We can achieve that. This legislation includes a declaration by Congress that Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty's activities should be transferred to the private sector no later than 1999 and that the Research Institute should be transferred at the earliest possible time. In other words, when we say privatization, we do not mean privatization using Federal taxpayer dollars; we mean privatization. If somebody wants to continue it, go ahead and raise the money, but do not take it from American taxpayers. This provision recognizes that it is neither feasible nor appropriate for the U.S. Government to continue to maintain these radios in perpetuity. These were established for the purpose of undermining Communist governments. As the media develops in Eastern Europe, there is less and less reason to have a U.S. Government-funded surrogate radio service. I, frankly, think that we can cut back a lot farther, a lot sooner in Eastern Europe than the agreement contemplates. The justification for Radio Liberty on the other hand, is a little stronger than the other justification, given the situation we are all aware of in the former Soviet Republics. There is agreement nevertheless that the end goal here should be to transfer these radios to the private sector no later than 1999, no more taxpayer dollars after that point. The administration, in this amendment, is directed not just to look at this, but to provide annual reports on the steps that it is taking to facilitate the complete transfer of this cold war relic from taxpayer-funded entities to entities provided for by any private organization that may want to do it. I have almost reached the conclusion of these rather lengthy remarks, but I feel the need to spend a minute or two on something else that is being accomplished through this legislation, something that I am not sure about, something that I am not enthusiastic about at this point, but something that I think we can also limit and make sure that it does not get into the kind of situation that RFE/RL has gotten into. The amendment also provides for a new surrogate broadcasting service, Radio Free Asia, to be established as a private grantee. The legislation provides for the grant to be administered by RFE/RL, incorporated, under the terms and conditions applicable to the grants for Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, as well as a number of other conditions which I have proposed. I am concerned, given the history we have just outlined of the private grantee arrangement, that unless there are very stringent fiscal controls applied to Radio Free Asia, we may well see the development of the same types of problems that have plagued the management of RFE/RL for decades. The amendments I have provided for RFA seek to prevent these problems in the future. First, the amendment provides that the administration must provide a detailed plan before it can commit funds for the establishment of this new broadcasting service. In authorizing Radio Free Asia, we are not giving the administration a blank check. OMB has provided members of the committee with a budget estimate that assumes that the new service can be operated at an annual cost of $22 million, with one-time capital expenditures of $8 million. This budget assumes that the new service will be able to utilize existing transmitters, either VOA transmitters or other existing transmitters. The amendment requires that the administration certifies that they have acquired access to utilize those transmitters before moving forward with establishing the new service. This provision is designed to prevent a situation where we are told by OMB that this service will cost less than $22 million and once commitments are made, Congress receives a much bigger bill because the existing transmitters are either not accessible to Radio Free Asia or don't meet its technical needs. This provision is intended to prevent a situation where the administration comes back in a year or two and says they need another $50 or $60 million to build new transmitters. If the administration cannot put together a detailed plan to operate this service with the budget constraints imposed in the legislation, they are directed to propose a different plan, which might well include simply increasing VOA broadcasting in the region. The legislation also requires GAO to review the administration's budget projections and advise Congress as to whether the fiscal assumptions are adequate and whether the plan can be implemented within the budget limitations. Second, the legislation requires an effectiveness study of Radio Free Asia after 3 years to determine whether it is technically sound and cost-effective, is received by a sufficient audience to warrant its continuation, the extent to which the targeted audiences are receiving similar broadcasts from other credible sources, and the extent to which the interests of the United States are being served by continued broadcasting. The legislation also contains a sunset provision, terminating authority to continue grants to operate RFA after September 30, 1998, with a 1-year extension if the President of the United States determines continuation is in the national interest. The effectiveness study and sunset provision are designated to prevent a situation developing where the United States continues to fund RFA, regardless of whether it is still relevant. Many people believe that shortwave radio broadcasting may soon be obsolete. It is important that we are not locked into continuing this service when it is no longer needed or effective. The amendment also requires that any contracts which the grantee enters into regarding RFA clearly specify all obligations are assumed by the grantee, not the United States and that funding for RFA may not be available after 1999. In attempting to reduce RFE/RL activities, we have repeatedly been told that the cost of terminating various contracts will be enormous and that the U.S. Government, not the grantee, will be held liable for RFE/RL's debts. In the case of RFA, we are asking that they notify employees and others in advance of the limitations, under which this program is being established. Finally, the amendment requires that to the maximum extent possible any lease agreements entered into should be assignable to the United States. Again, in the case of RFE/RL, we have been told that a full merger with VOA is not possible because some of the lease agreements are not assignable. That situation should be avoided in the future. Fourth, the legislation requires that the principal place of business of RFA shall be located within the United States, in the Washington area, unless the board determines that another location within the United States would be necessary to carry out the functions of RFA effectively and in a cost effective manner. As GAO has reported over the years, there is technically no reason why any of the radios cannot be operated out of the United States. If the new service is located in Washington, DC, it can pool resources and administrative functions with existing broadcasting services and achieve greater savings. The lower the overhead, the more funds can go into broadcasting, rather than administrative costs. Fifth, the legislation requires notification and consultation regarding displacement of Voice of America broadcasting in order to accommodate the broadcasting activities of Radio Free Asia. The legislation contemplates that the new service will utilize at least a portion of the VOA transmitters, but it is not contemplated that the very well regarded Asian broadcasting activities of VOA be reduced in order to accommodate this new service. Millions of people in Asia now listen to VOA and many use the English-language transmissions to learn English. In addition, VOA this year enhanced its operation in Hong Kong to include a bureau broadcasting Chinese domestic news in Mandarin. The new bureau includes four full-time journalists who travel regularly into China to report news and feature stories. The China Focus Program, already off to a strong start, currently broadcasts 1 hour a day, and plans are underway to expand it to 3 hours. It is very important that we do not fail to recognize the importance of the Voice of America in reaching out to all of the people of Asia, not simply the Communist countries. If the administration's plan for the new service requires a significant reduction in broadcasting activities of VOA, Congress should be notified and consulted before such a plan is put into operation. The purpose of establishing RFA is to enhance U.S. broadcasting in Asia, not diminish the effective work in this region of VOA. To conclude my statement, on this issue that we have been working on pretty hard for over a year, enactment of this amendment represents a major step forward in our efforts to reorganize and reorder our spending priorities in light of the end of the cold war. It has not been an easy task. Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty have many supporters, and they have made important contributions to U.S. foreign policy interests over the last four decades. It is totally understandable that there would be strong resistance to any change in the status quo. But this, we hope, President, is really a new era of fiscal constraints. We have to focus upon places in the Federal budget where savings can be achieved and the kinds of consolidations and downsizing that this amendment achieves. This amendment would eliminate one Federal agency, the Board For International Broadcasting. It would achieve important administrative savings by consolidating overseas broadcasting within USIA. It would make substantial reductions in the funding level for RFE/RL, cutting it by 64 percent--this is a significant number--as of 1996, and the budget would not be $210 million a year but only $75 million a year, with the expectation and hope that by 1999 it can be eliminated altogether from the point of view of Federal funding. The 4-year savings from our changes in overseas broadcasting will be approximately $400 million. That includes $162 million for the termination of the Israeli transmitter, which we have approved. Each year thereafter, the savings from reduced funding for RFE/RL will amount to $135 million per year. In other words, instead of like everything else we do, where we spend and forget about how much it is going to cost every year, this item will cause our Federal budget to go down $135 million every year as time goes on. It has been a long and challenging process to reach this agreement, but it was well worth the effort. The task is not finished, and we still have to complete a conference with the House of Representatives. Moreover, implementation of this legislation after it is signed into law will involve a lot of oversight and monitoring to help make sure that the goals Congress intended are actually achieved. That did not always happen in the past, as I have indicated. Today marks a significant milestone in our efforts to achieve spending reductions, especially in the foreign relations area, and to reorganize Federal efforts in the area of international broadcasting to reflect the end of the cold war. I conclude by thanking and congratulating all of the individuals and Members of the Senate who played important roles in achieving these changes. Again, I thank Senator Kerry, chairman of the subcommittee, who helped enormously; Senator Pell, the chairman of the committee and his staff; also, of course, Senator Kerry's staff, who were incredibly patient and supportive as we wrangled through this process; the members of the Foreign Relations Committee on both sides of the aisle, who lent me their strong support on this first initiative in foreign relations; and finally, of course, Senator Biden and his staff, who, although we approached this issue from very different perspectives, were gracious and forthcoming with regard to our areas of disagreement, and we did work hard to achieve an agreement. Finally, to the members of my own staff, Susanne Martinez and Robyn Lieberman, who I know spent almost an outrageous amount of hours to get this thing done. President, I apologize for the length of my remarks. I believe this is a rare instance where we are actually cutting back on a Federal program--not just cutting the increase, but actually bringing the spending down--and I wanted the Senate and the people of the country to know the details of it. President, I yield the floor. Exhibit 1 [From the New York Times, July 2, 1976] Two U.S.-Run Radios Chided on Salary--Report Finds Excessively High Pay Scale in Stations Beamed to Soviet Bloc (By David Binder) Washington, July 1.--A General Accounting Office study of the United States-operated Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty has disclosed cases of office secretaries receiving annual salaries of over $36,000 and middle-rank executives $67,000, amounts far in excess of regular government pay scales. The report made public earlier this week has drawn criticism from Congress and a promise by the Ford Administration to review pay scales of the two Munich-based stations that broadcast to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. In a letter to David M. Abshire, chairman of the Board for International Broadcasting, which supervised the stations, Senator John O. Pastore, Democratic of Rhode Island, cited the pay scales and said: ``These are shocking figures.'' By way of comparison, the study showed that a regular Government employee posted in Munich, with a base salary of $23,670 received extra allowances raising income to $31,870. A Radio Free Europe employee with the same base pay received the equivalent of $45,603. high conversion rate The difference was made up almost entirely by the favorable conversion rate from dollars to West German marks accorded Radio Free Europe employees. The favorable rate, as in the early days of allied occupation of West Germany, is 4 marks to the dollar. But following a series of revaluations since 1971, the mark is now officially pegged at about 2.50 to the dollar. The accounting study showed that almost 70 percent of the total cost of the radio stations, or $39.2 million, was attributable to personnel compensation and benefit practices, including $3 million in housing allowances for 600 employees. Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, declared in response to the report: ``It is just intolerable to continue these practices.'' Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty were founded and secretly financed by the Central Intelligence Agency in the early 1950's to provide news and analysis for Soviet and East European audiences in 25 languages. They have been under Congressional funding authority since 1971. to revise pay scales The General Accounting Office study concluded that the best way to deal with ``inequities'' and ``duplication'' it found in the Munich operations was to move the major part of the stations to the United States. At a meeting in mid-April with the directors of the Board for International Broadcasting, Sig-Michelson, president of the two radio stations for the last year, said he agreed with the general thrust of the accounting recommendations and was moving to carry them out, including a revision of the pay scales. The housing and other special compensations for the radio station employees were an outgrowth of the early occupation practices in what was then the American zone of Germany. An official familiar with the special benefits said that 80 percent of the two station's 1,786 employees were probably being fairly compensated, but that ``top executives are getting indefensibly high salaries.'' These executives are almost all American citizens.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I congratulate the Senator from Wisconsin and express my appreciation to him for his efforts in this. This has been a first-class and very significant effort, his first, as he described it, within the Foreign Relations Committee. But the Senator has really raised some extremely important questions about the administrative process, about management decisions, about the overall structure. He really has been the most important push, if you will, or force asking the committee and the Senate as a whole to really take a hard look at this and do what is correct. I thank him also not only for his initial effort but also for the work he did in reaching what I think is a very sensible compromise with the Senator from Delaware. I also express my appreciation to the Senator from Delaware. He and I did not agree at the outset on this. We had a vote in the committee and the outcome was adverse to the Senator from Delaware. But the Senator also persevered and continued to make his point and I think persuaded a number of people that his commitment on this was steadfast and that he saw a different vision of how this should and could work. I think what we have had in the final analysis is an amalgamation of the best of both of those views in a way that addresses the concerns of both Senators, but at the same time provides the savings that we need. It may be that down the road we are going to have to review this more. It may be that there will be adjusting yet to be done. But, for the moment, I think this gets us off the dime and provides an important service to the country and particularly to the goals of the foreign policy information promulgation effort. So I really tip my hat to the Senator. I think he has done a terrific job here.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I certainly join the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts in his praise of the Senator from Wisconsin and Senator Biden. For a year or more, they have been pushing a subject which is of great interest and concern to me. I just want you to know, I say to the Senator from Wisconsin, that I appreciate your efforts and you have been successful. Now, the Senator from Wisconsin has made clear the outcome of the negotiations for the establishment of a new Radio Free Asia patterned after a Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. Broadcasting to Tibet and to the Communist countries of Asia, North Korea, Burma, Communist China, Laos, and Vietnam, must, President, remain a high priority in order to encourage fledgling democracy movements in those countries. When the administration first presented its consolidation proposal to Congress last June 15, as I recall, the administration stated vigorously that the only way to save $243 million over the next 4 years was to consolidate all broadcasting functions under the U.S. Information Agency umbrella. Today, just about 6 months later, give or take, the administration has been promising that these same savings can be achieved under the new and improved consolidation plan which allows Radio Free Asia, Radio Free Europe, and Radio Liberty to stand as private grantees. Either somebody was misinformed then or they have seen the light or whatever. But that is not the important issue. What is important is that the U.S. Information Agency, Duffey, Director of USIA, and Mica, who is Chairman of the Board of International Broadcasting, have made a significant positive decision in accepting the terms of the Biden- Feingold amendment. Incidentally, I ask unanimous consent that I be added as a cosponsor of this amendment, as modified.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I will explain the modification in just a moment. This policy ensures that the U.S. Government will continue broadcasting Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Asia. All will maintain their independent grantee status. It does all of that and so forth. In all candor, I am not persuaded that this bill gives this new creation the resources it will need to please everybody and still save the money that everybody talks about. So I hope that Duffey and his associates in the White House have thought through that issue. This point is important and that is the reason I am stressing it. USIA should be prepared to provide those resources out of its own budget, if necessary, to fulfill the broadcasting priorities that are being defined here today. So, again, I express my gratitude to the able Senator from Delaware, Biden, and the equally able Senator from Wisconsin, Feingold, for accepting a modification that I proposed, that will ensure that this will happen. I commend them for their efforts, because the American taxpayer will not be willing to spend more money on these projects than is currently authorized in this bill. So, in committing to this course of action, I hope that the administration is prepared to use its energy and resources to see these projects through to their completion. Now, to make legislative history and have it in the Congressional Record, President, I ask unanimous consent that lines 6-17 on page 24 of the bill, be printed in the Record at this point. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: SEC. 310. TRANSITION. (a) Authorization.--(1) The President is authorized to direct the transfer of all functions and authorities from the Board for International Broadcasting to the United States Information Agency, the Board, or the Bureau as may be necessary to implement this title. (2)(A) Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Chairman of the Board for International Broadcasting shall jointly prepare and submit to the President for approval and implementation a plan to implement the provisions of this title. Such report shall include at a minimum a detailed cost analysis to implement fully the recommendations of such plan. Additionally, such plan shall identify all costs in excess of those authorized for such purposes and shall provide that any excess cost to implement such plan shall be derived only from funds authorized in title II, part A, section 201(a)(1) of this Act.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Then, President, immediately following that, I desire to have printed in the Record the modification that I proposed to Senators Biden and Feingold and which they graciously accepted. And I want it to follow immediately after the preceding insert.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Reading the modification: Such report shall include at a minimum a detailed cost analysis to implement fully the recommendations of such plan. Additionally, such plan. Additionally, such plan shall identify all costs in excess of those authorized for such purposes and shall provide that any excess cost to implement such plan shall be derived only from funds authorized in title II, part A, section 201(a)1 of this act. ____________________
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, along another line for just a moment. As a Senator from North Carolina, I have begun presenting to the Senate each day for the third year what I call the box score on Federal deficit spending. I started this on February 25, 1992. I reported the precise, exact Federal debt run up by the Congress of the United States down to the penny. The first report was on February 25. The latest report we had available on February 25 was the close of business of February 21, 1992. As of February 21, 1992, the Federal debt stood at $3 trillion-- $3,823,909,309,474.57. At the close of business yesterday, President, the Federal debt stood at $4,506,790,072,963.29. That means that since February 21, 1992 the Federal debt has increased by $682,880,763,488.72. This means that on per capita basis, as of today, with the debt, and I repeat, as of close of business yesterday standing at $4,506,790,072,963.29--that means that on a per capita basis every man, woman, and child in the United States owes $17,286.54 as his or her share of that national debt. I thank the Chair and I yield the floor. ____________________
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, I am very pleased to join my colleagues in sponsoring this amendment, and I want to reiterate my appreciation to Senator Biden and Senator Feingold for their efforts to resolve their differences on broadcasting. I know that both Senators have been very engaged in this issue. This amendment preserves the critical cost savings provisions of the administration's proposal while it also retains for Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty the independence that has made them such effective voices in the past. We have received testaments from a number of Eastern European leaders on the importance of RFE/RL to their countries over the past years. The amendment establishes the same sort of independence for Radio Free Asia. At the same time, the amendment imposes tight cost controls to ensure that the radio operates in the most cost effective manner possible. I commend Senator Feingold for his efforts in this area. To conclude, I think U.S. foreign policy and American taxpayers will benefit from this amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask for the yeas and nays on the amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there a sufficient second? There is a sufficient second. The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I believe we are going to ask to set this aside indefinitely?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Exactly.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent this amendment be set aside, subject to the call of the managers of the bill.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, that means, of course, that the bill is open to further amendment, is that correct?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator is correct.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I thank the Chair. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. Amendment No. 1247 (Purpose: To amend the Foreign Service Act of 1980 to provide the Secretary with authority to take reduction in force actions with regard to members of the Foreign Service, and for other purposes)
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask that it be stated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report the amendment. The bill clerk read as follows: The Senator from North Carolina [Helms] proposes an amendment numbered 1247.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: At the appropriate place in title II, part B, add the following: SECTION 1. REDUCTION IN FORCE AUTHORITY WITH REGARD TO THE FOREIGN SERVICE. (a) In General.--(1) Title VI of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.) is amended-- (A) by redesignating sections 611, 612, and 613 as sections 612, 613, and 614 respectively; and (B) by inserting after section 610 the following new section: ``Sec. 611. Reductions in Force.--(a) The Secretary may conduct reductions in force and may prescribe regulations for the separation of members of the Service under such reductions in force which give due effect to-- ``(1) organizational need; ``(2) documented employee qualifications, knowledge, skills, or competencies; ``(3) documented employee performance; ``(4) tenure of employment; and ``(5) military preference. ``(6) For purposes of this section the term `members of the Service' means the individuals described under section 103.''. (2) The table of contents for the Foreign Service Act of 1980 is amended by striking out the items related to section 611, 612, and 613 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Sec. 611. Reductions in force. ``Sec. 612. Termination of limited appointments. ``Sec. 613. Termination of appointments of consular agents and foreign national employees. ``Sec. 614. Foreign Service awards.''. (b) Management Rights.--Section 1005(a) of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4105(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as paragraphs (4) through (7), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) to conduct reductions in force, and to prescribe regulations for the separation of employees under such reductions in force conducted under section 611;'' (c) Consultation.--The Secretary of State shall consult with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management before prescribing regulations for reductions in force under section 611 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (as added by subsection (a) of this section).
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, this amendment will give the Secretary of State the same authority over his employees that the Secretaries of every other agency or department has over his or her employees. This amendment expands the flexibility of the Secretary of State in organizing and structuring the Department of State staffing levels as he deems necessary. A rather unique situation exists here. The situation needs to be changed. This amendment amends the Foreign Service Act of 1980 by giving the Secretary of State the authority to reduce but not increase the number of employees at the State Department. Currently, the U.S. Code provides each Cabinet-level Secretary the authority to reduce the number of civil servants in his or her own agency. This authority does not apply to the Foreign Service. Unlike the Civil Service, the Foreign Service is protected from Government downsizing through a reduction in force. It is incredible, it seems to me, that the Secretary of State does not have the authority to reduce in force anybody in the Foreign Service. Oh, sure, he may allow the size of the Service to shrink through attrition or through the elimination of promotion positions in future years, but he has only limited ability to downsize, and he has now only the authority to reduce in force the civil servants. This is purely an employee-management issue. If the head of an organization finds that his staff is bloated, topheavy, of course he should be able to restructure around the needs and objectives of the organization, in this case the Department of State. Members of the Foreign Service should not be treated as a protected class of privileged individuals. They should be treated no differently than members of the civil service on this issue. In order to have the flexibility to establish fair personnel practices at the State Department, the Secretary of State should have the authority--whether he has the guts or not is another question--this amendment offers. If the President directed the Secretary of State to reduce personnel levels tomorrow, all reductions would fall upon civil servants, regardless of need. The Secretary would be absolutely unable under the law to structure personnel levels based on need or skills necessary to carry out a mission. The Secretary of Defense has made significant downsizing decisions, and the Secretary of State may have to do the same. This bill approved a reduction of $50 million in State Department salaries and expenses, and the report language on this provision directs the Secretary of State to take those cuts in the Washington headquarters bureaucracy and not in the field operations; just plain, common, economic good sense. The Secretary of State should have the authority necessary to do what Congress is directing him to do. That is the purpose of this amendment. There is no guarantee that this authority will ever be exercised by the Secretary of State. I am not sure he is standing up down there applauding this amendment. I do not care whether he is or not. What I care about is playing fair with the American taxpayers and not having this elite crowd down there wearing striped pants walking around doing nothing. This amendment merely affords the Secretary of State the opportunity to take action when the State Department personnel system is bloated and burdened with an excess of superfluous employees. Needless to say, I hope he uses the authority, but nothing in my amendment requires him to use it. This amendment follows the spirit of the Vice President's plan for improving the Federal Government. Plain and simple, President, it is a good-Government amendment that deserves to be adopted. I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I thank the distinguished Senator from North Carolina. This is a good amendment. The Secretary has that authority already for the civil service, and there is really no rationale for his not having it with respect to the Foreign Service, and he ought to. So we join with the Senator from North Carolina, and we are willing to accept this. I do not believe there is anybody else desiring to speak on it.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there further debate on the amendment? If not, the question is on agreeing to the amendment. The amendment (No. 1247) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the amendment was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. Amendment No. 1248 (Purpose: To withhold funds for fiscal years 1994 and 1995 from the funds authorized to be appropriated for ``Contributions for International Organizations'' until the President certifies that no United Nations agency or United Nations-affiliated agency grants any recognition to an organization that condones pedophilia)
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask that it be stated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from North Carolina [Helms] proposes an amendment numbered 1248.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: On page 9, line 16, after ``purposes'' insert the following new subsection (b) and renumber the rest of the section accordingly: (b) Withholding of Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the funds authorized to be appropriated for ``Contributions for International Organizations'' shall be reduced in the amount of $118,875,000 for each fiscal years 1994 and 1995, and for each year thereafter, unless the President of the Senate that no United Nations Agency or United Nations-Affiliated agency grants any official status, accreditation, or recognition to any organization which promotes, condones, or seeks the legalization of pedophilia, or which includes as a subsidiary or member any such organization.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, as the distinguished occupant of the chair has perceived, I think, this is Save the Taxpayers Day in the U.S. Senate. This amendment, the pending amendment, reduces the U.S.-assessed contribution to international organizations by, as the clerk has just indicated, $118,875,000 for fiscal year 1994 and fiscal year 1995 unless the President of the United States certifies to Congress that no United Nations agency grants any official status, accreditation, or recognition to any organization that promotes, condones or seeks the legalization of pedophilia. If we are not willing to do that, we ought not to talk about family values or anything else. If we support bums like that in the United Nations, we ought to get out of town and stay gone. I have argued for a long time--as have other Senators, including the distinguished occupant of the chair--that the values and objectives of the United Nations seldom coincide with those of the vast majority of the American people. Actions of the United Nations Economic and Social Council underscore a crucial point: We should never, never look to the United Nations to safeguard American interests and values. I never fathomed that the day would come when the United Nations would officially condone the sexual molestation of children. Tragically and shockingly, that is precisely what has happened, and it is outrageous. Where were the U.S. officials, who are paid by the American taxpayers and confirmed by the Senate to safeguard American interests at the United Nations? Once again, they were fast asleep at the switch. Let me be specific, President. This past summer, the United Nations Economic and Social Council, [ECOSOC], granted what is termed consultative status to an outfit called the ``International Lesbian and Gay Association.'' Now, this International Lesbian and Gay Association is a worldwide umbrella group of homosexual organizations headquartered in Brussels, Belgium. According to documents supplied by the International Lesbian and Gay Association, one of its member organizations in the United States is the notorious North American Man Boy Love Association, frequently referred to by its acronym NAMBLA, [N-A-M-B-L-A]. Now, NAMBLA is a pro pedophile organization. There is no question about it, no contest to that description of it. This organization makes little effort to hide its objectives. On page 2 of NAMBLA's publication--the name of it is the NAMBLA Bulletin--it states--and this is a direct quote from the publication: We work to organize support for boys and men who have or desire consensual sexual and emotional relationships and to educate society on their positive nature. President, as the little girl in the comic page used to say, ``I may 'fro' up.'' Now, some may think that the International Lesbian and Gay Association did not know about NAMBLA's pro pedophile agenda. However, the International Lesbian and Gay Association readily admits that it has known about NAMBLA's agenda since 1984. So, President, it had to be crystal clear to anyone who conducted any research whatsoever into NAMBLA, that this is an outfit catering to the twisted desires of pedophiles. NAMBLA made no effort to hide those objectives--and guess who has embraced them with open arms--the United Nations. Somehow, nobody at the U.S. mission to the United Nations was alarmed by these organizations when it came time to vote. The vote in ECOSOC to recognize this group took place July 30 of last year. ILGA, including NAMBLA, was approved for consultative status by a vote of 22 to 4 with 17 countries abstaining. Believe it or not, the United States of America, along with 21 other nations, put our stamp of approval, our stamp of approval, on this international homosexual lobbying organization, a group that condones sexual molestation of children. See why I am offering the amendment, President? What does it mean for ECOSOC to provide a consultative status to this pro pedophile organization? Good question. ECOSOC, the U.N. Economic and Social Council, according to a handbook published by the United Nations is, and I quote: The principal organ to coordinate the economic and social work of the United Nations. It purportedly deals with a broad spectrum of issues ranging from human rights and economic and social and cultural and educational and health and related matters. As with most U.N. agencies, finding out how many dollars are actually spent each year by ECOSOC, the U.N. Economic and Social Council, is impossible; you cannot tell. You cannot find out anything. But according to a memorandum dated September 28, 1993, the Congressional Research Service estimated that ECOSOC spent $951 million for the years 1992-93 to carry out programs and activities. Now, President, in addition to the funding provided by ECOSOC, the United Nations has developed a system for granting what is called consultative status to private, nongovernmental organizations. According to U.N. documents, and I am quoting: ECOSOC may consult with nongovernmental organizations which are concerned with matters within the council's competence. It goes on to say: The council recognizes that these organizations should have the opportunity to express their views and that they often possess special experience and technical knowledge of value to the council in its work. What is the special competence that NAMBLA contributes to the United Nations? I have obtained, and I can make copies available to any Senator who wants to read about it, copies of the NAMBLA Bulletin, to which I referred just a moment ago. That is the official publication of that organization. Let me give the Senate, for the purpose of making it clear in the Congressional Record, a few direct quotes from this bulletin published by and for perverted individuals. The North American Man Boy Love Association is both political and educational. We work to organize support for boys and men who have or desire consensual sexual and emotional relationships and to educate society on their positive nature. Then it goes on to say: We speak out against the oppression endured by men and boys who love one another and support the right of all people to consensual intergenerational relationships. What hogwash. Then it goes on to point out that ``NAMBLA was founded in 1978, within Boston's gay and lesbian community, in response to a witch hunt against man boy lovers in that city. An article entitled ``Staying Safe and Happy as a Man-Boy Lover,'' in the October 1991 issue of the Bulletin, which is the official NAMBLA publication, provides tips for men wishing to engage in sexual relationships with little boys and how not to get caught doing it. Talking to the police, the Bulletin suggests, is a bad idea. Do not say anything. If a cop comes around, just keep quiet. Another suggestion offered in the Bulletin is: ``Don't keep photos of your partner in a place where police might find them.'' It also suggests: ``Never discuss the specifics of an illegal relationship with therapists or social workers.'' In other words, President, the NAMBLA Bulletin is a how-to guide for child molesters. There is no question that the larger organization recognized by the United Nations and the International Lesbian and Gay Association knew about NAMBLA's despicable agenda. They knew it. They do not deny it. Indeed, the ILGA has even passed resolutions of its own supportive of pedophilia. Consider the following: A 1990 resolution under the heading of ``Man- Boy/Woman-Girl Love'' referred to pedophiles as a sexual minority and called on members to treat them ``with respect, and to engage in instructive dialog with them.'' It will never happen, as far as I am concerned, President. In 1986, a resolution stated support for ``the right of young people to sexual and social self-determination,'' and a 1990 resolution declared ``the right of every individual, regardless of age, to explore and develop her or his sexuality.'' For its part, NAMBLA insists that it is by no means a fringe member of the ILGA. In fact, NAMBLA contends that for years, NAMBLA was that group's only member organization in the United States of America. Another article, in the September 1992 issue of the NAMBLA Bulletin, to which I referred earlier, boasts, brags, about its influence in the umbrella decision. It states that an effort had been made several years ago by the ILGA to ``repeal positions that support sex between men and free boys,'' but that the lobbying of NAMBLA and many other fringe pedophile and civil rights groups prevented this from happening. Do you not see, President? The United Nations has created a sort of hierarchy among these groups which are given consultative status. The homosexual group, which includes NAMBLA, was given what is called roster status, which is the lowest degree. However, that group has stated its desire to seek category 2 status, which would allow it to request hearings and then later to seek category 1 status, which would allow it to propose agenda items to ECOSOC. Groups in all three categories can send representatives to official ECOSOC meetings and submit written statements for circulation to the ECOSOC delegation. President, it is important to recognize, I think, that any category of so-called consultative status, even the ``roster'' status conferred on this homosexual group, which includes NAMBLA, is seen as a major achievement by them in terms of official recognition, and as they say in gaining legitimacy. Receiving any degree of respectability or consultative status is a message that the recognized group has special competence in the issues with which it is involved and which are pertinent to the United Nations. Needless to say, the U.N. action was seen as a big victory by the national homosexual organizations. They danced in the streets. Oh, they slapped each other on the backs and maybe other things as well. The local newspaper which caters to the homosexual community, the Washington Blade, crooned. Let me quote the headline. The headline was: ``Gays Win Voice at United Nations.'' That was on page 1 in the August 20, 1993 issue of the Blade. A spokesman for the international homosexual group approved by ECOSOC stated in that newspaper, the Blade: ``We now have direct access into the U.N. machinery, whereas before we were always on the outside knocking on the door. Now we are in the system.'' This amendment proposes to keep them out of the system, or at least not put a nickel of the American taxpayers' money into that crowd. In reply to press inquiries about this oversight--I am being charitable when I say oversight--the State Department says they did not know that NAMBLA was a part of this international homosexual umbrella group. ``Goodness gracious,'' they said, ``how did that happen?'' In view of this administration's record of bumbling on foreign policy matters, this is an entirely plausible explanation, I suppose. I will just let it slide. Privately, I have to say to some of the folks down at the State Department--they are horribly embarrassed about this episode, and they should be. They should be outraged, as a matter of fact. I guess it is fair to assume that they are being candid when they said they did not know about the umbrella group's pedophile resolutions. Since the administration is unable to monitor which groups are being recognized by the United Nations, this amendment is intended to provide and to ensure some accountability because it cuts off a portion of the U.S. contribution to international organizations unless and until the President of the United States certifies to the Congress that no U.N. agency--I repeat, no U.N. agency--grants recognition to pedophile organizations. Maybe that will provide some incentive to check into this sort of thing the next time around before the United Nations gets any more American tax dollars. President, we do not have necessary Senators present. But at the appropriate time, I shall ask for the yeas and nays on the amendment. I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. amendment no. 1246
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, after consulting with my distinguished colleague from Massachusetts, who is managing this bill, he and I agree that it will not be necessary to have a vote on amendment No. 1246, so I ask unanimous consent that the yeas and nays be vitiated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I thank the Chair.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, if the yeas and nays are now vitiated, then the pending business would be that amendment. Could we have a vote on that amendment? I do not believe there is any further debate.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  If there is no further debate, then the question is on agreeing to amendment No. 1246. The amendment (No. 1246) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Robb). Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I have a parliamentary inquiry to which I know the answer. Just for the record, what is the pending business?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The pending business is amendment No. 1248 offered by the Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that that amendment may be laid aside temporarily in order that I may call up another amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? Without objection, the amendment is temporarily laid aside.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I thank the Chair. President, it is my intent, when Senator Kerry returns to the floor, to seek the yeas and nays on the amendment which we just laid aside. But we will take care of that in due course. Amendment No. 1249
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask that it be stated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report the amendment. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from North Carolina [Helms] proposes an amendment numbered 1249. On page 179, line 6, after the word ``agreement'' add the following: ``or a bilateral U.S. nuclear cooperation agreement.''
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, before I begin, I will say to my colleagues, or their staff members in their offices who may be watching the proceedings on television, that I do not want to hog the show. If Senators have amendments, or even if one Senator has an amendment that he would like to deal with this afternoon, I will certainly yield the floor for that purpose. But in the meantime, this is a very clear and brief amendment, because this amendment is basically only a clarification of a provision which already exists in the bill. Currently, section 713(b) of S. 1281 states that a nonnuclear weapons state which abrogates an International Atomic Energy Agency full scope safeguard agreement cannot and will not receive foreign aid from the United States or any other aid, for that matter. We simply must put our national foot down and say we will not have it. This amendment adds to this prohibition simply by stating that if a country violates a nuclear cooperation agreement with the United States, that country would lose its U.S. aid. Clear enough. Let me read the section with the pending amendment included. (b) Prohibition. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no U.S. assistance, under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 shall be provided to any nonnuclear weapon State that is found by the President to have terminated, abrogated, or materially violated an IAEA full-scope safeguard agreement, or---- coming to the pending amendment: or a bilateral U.S. nuclear cooperation agreement. That is the way that provision will read with and including the pending amendment. I think that the United States should care as much about adherence to U.S. bilateral agreements as it cares about adherence to an international agency agreement. It makes no sense to me, to say that a country cannot receive U.S. aid after breaking an IAEA agreement, but it can receive such aid after breaking an agreement with the United States. As a sovereign nation, the United States has the right to determine how it will react to a breach of a binding obligation by another country. We are not rewriting any rules. The United States is simply stating how we will react to a breach of a binding obligation by another country. This does not apply IAEA standards to agreements with the United States. This amendment, I reiterate for the purpose of emphasis, simply would require compliance with agreements that have already been signed. I think most of us would agree that compliance with nuclear cooperation agreements is extremely important to our national interests, and potentially extremely dangerous if nuclear material is not treated with the utmost concern and caution. The pending amendment makes very clear the seriousness that the United States places on compliance with nuclear agreements. Now, who would this affect? Well, it would not affect any country that adheres to its agreements, obviously. And our friends have nothing to worry about, unless--unless--they violate the provisions of a nuclear cooperation agreement, and then they ought to have to worry a little bit. Most agreements contain a mechanism for cancellation for the official abrogation between two sovereign nations. The main difference, President, is that we will know--the entire world will know--about those nations that officially abrogate IAEA or bilateral nuclear agreements. Now, I would emphasize that this amendment is absolutely prospective and would not immediately sanction any country. However, the United States has a number of bilateral nuclear cooperation agreements throughout the world which potentially could be affected in the future. Again, for the purpose of emphasis, this provision will affect only those countries who violate their commitments to IAEA or to the United States of America. I, of course, hope that my fellow Senators will agree to this amendment. I yield the floor. Since I am the only one on the floor, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The absence of a quorum has been suggested. The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The Chair recognizes the Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, having the right to modify my amendment I send such modification to the desk.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator has that right. The amendment is modified accordingly. The amendment (No. 1249), as modified, is as follows: On page 179, line 6, after the word ``agreement'' add the following: ``or materially violated a bilateral U.S. nuclear cooperation agreement.''
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there further debate on amendment 1249, as modified? If there be no further debate, the question is on agreeing to the amendment. The amendment (No. 1249), as modified, was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. Unanimous Consent Agreement
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, first of all, with respect to the amendment of the Senator from North Carolina, which is currently temporarily set aside, amendment No. 1248, I ask unanimous consent that no second- degree amendments be in order to that amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Rhode Island, Senator Pell. Amendment No. 1250 (Purpose: To amend the Arms Control and Disarmament Act to strengthen the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and to improve congressional oversight of the activities of the Agency)
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, I send to the desk an amendment and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, amendment No. 1248, which is pending, is temporarily laid aside and the clerk will report the amendment. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Rhode Island [Pell] proposes an amendment numbered 1250.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following new title: TITLE VIII--ARMS CONTROL AND NONPROLIFERATION ACT OF 1994 SEC. 801. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES IN ACT; TABLE OF CONTENTS. (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Arms Control and Nonproliferation Act of 1994''. (b) References in Title.--Except as specifically provided in this title, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to or repeal of a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to the Arms Control and Disarmament Act. SEC. 802. CONGRESSIONAL DECLARATIONS; PURPOSE. (a) Congressional Declarations.--The Congress declares that-- (1) a fundamental goal of the United States, particularly in the wake of the highly turbulent and uncertain international situation fostered by the end of the Cold War, the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the resulting emergence of fifteen new independent states, and the revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe, is to eliminate chemical and biological weapons and to reduce and limit the large numbers of nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union and, more generally, to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and of high- technology conventional armaments as well as to prevent regional conflicts and conventional arms races; and (2) an ultimate goal of the United States continues to be a world in which the use of force is subordinated to the rule of law and international change is achieved peacefully without the danger and burden of destabilizing and costly armaments. (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this title is-- (1) to strengthen the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; and (2) to improve congressional oversight of the arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. SEC. 803. PURPOSES. Section 2 (22 U.S.C. 2551) is amended in the text following the third undesignated paragraph by striking paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) and by inserting the following new paragraphs: ``(1) The preparation for and management of United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the arms control and disarmament field. ``(2) When directed by the President, the preparation for, and management of, United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the nonproliferation field. ``(3) The conduct, support, and coordination of research for arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament policy formulation. ``(4) The preparation for, operation of, or, as appropriate, direction of, United States participation in such control systems as may become part of United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities. ``(5) The dissemination and coordination of public information concerning arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament.''. SEC. 804. REPEALS. The following provisions of law are hereby repealed: (1) Section 26 (22 U.S.C. 2566), relating to the General Advisory Committee. (2) Section 36 (22 U.S.C. 2578), relating to arms control impact information and analysis. (3) Section 38 (22 U.S.C. 2578), relating to reports on Standing Consultative Commission activities. (4) Section 1002 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1986 (22 U.S.C. 2592a), relating to an annual report on Soviet compliance with arms control commitments. SEC. 805. DIRECTOR. Section 22 (22 U.S.C. 2562) is amended to read as follows: ``DIRECTOR ``Sec. 22. (a) Appointment.--The Agency shall be headed by a Director appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. No person serving on active duty as a commissioned officer of the Armed Forces of the United States may be appointed Director. ``(b) Duties.--(1) The Director shall serve as the principal adviser to the Secretary of State, the National Security Council, and the President and other executive branch Government officials on matters relating to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters. In carrying out his duties under this Act, the Director, under the direction of the President and the Secretary of State, shall have primary responsibility within the Government for matters relating to arms control and disarmament, and, whenever directed by the President, primary responsibility within the Government for matters relating to nonproliferation. ``(2) The Director shall attend all meetings of the National Security Council involving weapons procurement, arms sales, consideration of the defense budget, and all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters.''. SEC. 806. BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND DIVISIONS. Section 25 (22 U.S.C. 2565) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC. 25. BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND DIVISIONS. ``The Director, under the direction of the Secretary of State, may establish within the Agency such bureaus, offices, and divisions as he may determine to be necessary to discharge his responsibilities pursuant to this Act, including a bureau of intelligence and information support and an office to perform legal services for the Agency.''. SEC. 807. PRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVES. (a) Sections 27 and 28 (22 U.S.C. 2567, 2568) are redesignated as sections 26 and 27, respectively. (b) Section 26 (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended to read as follows: ``PRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVES ``Sec. 26. The President may appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, Special Representatives of the President for Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament. Each Presidential Special Representative shall hold the personal rank of ambassador. Presidential Special Representatives appointed under this section shall perform their duties and exercise their powers under direction of the President and the Secretary of State, acting through the Director. The Agency shall be the Government agency responsible for providing administrative support, including funding, staff, and office space, to all Presidential Special Representatives.''. SEC. 808. POLICY FORMULATION. Section 33 (22 U.S.C. 2573) is amended to read as follows: ``POLICY FORMULATION ``Sec. 33. (a) Formulation.--The Director shall prepare for the President, the Secretary of State, and the heads of such other Government agencies as the President may determine, recommendations and advice concerning United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament policy. ``(b) Prohibition.--No action shall be taken pursuant to this or any other Act that would obligate the United States to reduce or limit the Armed Forces or armaments of the United States in a militarily significant manner, except pursuant to the treaty-making power of the President set forth in Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the Constitution or unless authorized by the enactment of further affirmative legislation by the Congress of the United States.''. SEC. 809. NEGOTIATION MANAGEMENT. Section 34 (22 U.S.C. 2574) is amended to read as follows: ``negotiation management ``Sec. 34. (a) Responsibilities.--The Director, under the direction of the President and the Secretary of State, shall have primary responsibility for the preparation, conduct, and management of United States participation in all international negotiations and implementation fora in the field of arms control and disarmament and shall have primary responsibility, whenever directed by the President, for the preparation, conduct, and management of United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the field of nonproliferation. In furtherance of these responsibilities Special Representatives of the President for Nonproliferation, established pursuant to section 26, shall, as directed by the President, serve as the United States Government representatives to international organizations, conferences, and activities relating to the field of nonproliferation, such as the preparations for and conduct of the review relating to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. ``(b) Functions With Respect to the United States Information Agency.--The Director shall perform functions pursuant to section 2(c) of the Reorganization Plan 8 of 1953 with respect to providing to the United States Information Agency official United States positions and policy on arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters for dissemination abroad. ``(c) Authority.--The Director is authorized-- ``(1) to formulate plans and make preparations for the establishment, operation, and funding of inspections and control systems which may become part of the United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities; and ``(2) as authorized by law, to put into effect, direct, or otherwise assume United States responsibility for such systems.''. SEC. 810. REPORT ON MEASURES TO COORDINATE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. Not later than March 31, 1995, the President shall submit to the Congress a report prepared by the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, in coordination with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of Central Intelligence, with respect to the procedures established pursuant to section 35 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 U.S.C. 2575) for the effective coordination of research and development on arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament among all departments and agencies of the executive branch of Government. SEC. 811. NEGOTIATING RECORDS. (a) In General.--The Arms Control and Disarmament Act is amended by inserting after section 35 the following: ``NEGOTIATING RECORDS ``Sec. 36. (a) Preparation of Records.--The Director shall establish and maintain records for each arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreement to which the United States is a party and which was under negotiation or in force on or after January 1, 1990, which shall include classified and unclassified materials such as instructions and guidance, position papers, reporting cables and memoranda of conversation, working papers, draft texts of the agreement, diplomatic notes, notes verbal, and other internal and external correspondence. ``(b) Negotiating and Implementation Records.--In particular, the Director shall establish and maintain a negotiating and implementation record for each such agreement, which shall be comprehensive and detailed, and shall document all communications between the parties with respect to such agreement. Such records shall be maintained both in hard copy and magnetic media. ``(c) Participation of Agency Personnel.--In order to implement effectively this section, the Director shall ensure that Agency personnel participate throughout the negotiation and implementation phases of all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements.''. (b) Report Required.--Not later than January 31, 1995, the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a detailed report describing the actions he has undertaken to implement section 36 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act. SEC. 812. VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE. Section 37 (22 U.S.C. 2577) is amended to read as follows: ``VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE ``Sec. 37. (a) In General.--In order to ensure that arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements can be adequately verified, the Director shall report to Congress, on a timely basis, or upon request by an appropriate committee of the Congress-- ``(1) in the case of any arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreement that has been concluded by the United States, the determination of the Director as to the degree to which the components of such agreement can be verified; ``(2) in the case of any arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreement that has entered into force, any significant degradation or alteration in the capacity of the United States to verify compliance of the components of such agreement; and ``(3) the amount and percentage of research funds expended by the Agency for the purpose of analyzing issues relating to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament verification. ``(b) Standard for Verification of Compliance.--In making determinations under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a), the Director shall assume all measures of concealment not expressly prohibited could be employed and that standard practices could be altered so as to impede verification. ``(c) Rule of Construction.--Except as otherwise provided for by law, nothing in this section may be construed as requiring the disclosure of sensitive information relating to intelligence sources or methods or persons employed in the verification of compliance with arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements. ``(d) Participation of the Agency.--In order to ensure adherence of the United States to obligations or commitments undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements, and in order for the Director to make the assessment required by section 51(a)(5), the Director, or the Director's designee, shall participate in all interagency groups or organizations within the executive branch of Government that assess, analyze, or review United States planned or ongoing policies, programs, or actions that have a direct bearing on United States adherence to obligations undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreements.''. SEC. 813. AUTHORITIES WITH RESPECT TO NONPROLIFERATION MATTERS. (a) Amendments to the Arms Export Control Act.--(1) Section 38(a)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall be made in coordination with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, taking into account the Director's assessment as to whether the export of an article would contribute to an arms race, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other arrangements. The Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is authorized, whenever the Director determines that the issuance of an export license under this section would be detrimental to the national security of the United States, to recommend to the President that such export license be disapproved.''. (2) Section 42(a) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2791(a)) is amended-- (A) by redesignating clauses (1), (2), and (3) as clauses (A), (B), and (C), respectively; (B) by inserting ``(1)'' immediately after ``(a)''; (C) by amending clause (C) (as redesignated) to read as follows: ``(C) the assessment of the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency as to whether, and the extent to which, such sale might contribute to an arms race, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other arrangements;''; and (D) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Any proposed sale made pursuant to this Act shall be approved only after consultation with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is authorized, whenever the Director determines that a sale under this section would be detrimental to the national security of the United States, to recommend to the President that such sale be disapproved.''. (3) Section 71(a) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(a)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Defense''. (4) Section 71(b)(1) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(b)(1)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``Secretary of Defense''. (5) Section 71(b)(2) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(b)(2)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Commerce''. (6) Section 71(c) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(c)) is amended by inserting ``to include the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``other appropriate Government agencies''. (7) Section 73(d) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(d)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Commerce''. (b) Amendment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act.-- Section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 2139(a)) is amended in the second sentence by striking out ``, as required,''. SEC. 814. APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF PERSONNEL. Section 41(b) (22 U.S.C. 2581(b)) is amended by striking all that follows ``General Schedule pay rates,'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``except that-- ``(1) the Director may, to the extent the Director determines necessary, appoint in the excepted service, and fix the compensation of, employees possessing specialized technical expertise without regard to provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointment or compensation of employees of the United States, ``(2) an employee who is appointed under this provision may not be paid a salary in excess of the rate payable for positions of equivalent difficulty or responsibility, and in no event, may be paid at a rate exceeding the maximum rate in effect for level 15 of the General Schedule, and ``(3) the number of employees appointed under this paragraph shall not exceed ten percent of the number of positions allowed under the Agency's full-time equivalent limitation.''. SEC. 815. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS. Section 45(a) (22 U.S.C. 2585) is amended in the third sentence-- (1) by inserting ``or employed directly from other Government agencies'' after ``persons detailed from other Government agencies''; and (2) by striking ``by the Department of Defense or the Department of State'' and inserting ``by such agencies''. SEC. 816. ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. (a) In General.--Title IV of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act is amended-- (1) by striking sections 49 and 50; (2) by redesignating sections 51 and 53 as sections 49 and 50, respectively; and (3) by inserting after section 50 (as redesignated by paragraph (2)) the following new sections: ``ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS ``Sec. 51. (a) In General.--Not later than January 31 of each year, the President shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report prepared by the Director, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Director of Central Intelligence, on the status of United States policy and actions with respect to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament. Such report shall include-- ``(1) a detailed statement concerning the arms control and disarmament objectives of the executive branch of Government for the forthcoming year; ``(2) a detailed statement concerning the nonproliferation objectives of the executive branch of Government for the forthcoming year; ``(3) a detailed assessment of the status of any ongoing arms control or disarmament negotiations, including a comprehensive description of negotiations or other activities during the preceding year and an appraisal of the status and prospects for the forthcoming year; ``(4) a detailed assessment of the status of any ongoing nonproliferation negotiations or other activities, including a comprehensive description of the negotiations or other activities during the preceding year and an appraisal of the status and prospects for the forthcoming year; ``(5) a detailed assessment of adherence of the United States to obligations undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements, including information on the policies and organization of each relevant agency or department of the United States to ensure adherence to such obligations, a description of national security programs with a direct bearing on questions of adherence to such obligations and of steps being taken to ensure adherence, and a compilation of any substantive questions raised during the preceding year and any corrective action taken; and ``(6) a detailed assessment of the adherence of other nations to obligations undertaken in all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements to which the United States is a participating state, including information on actions taken by each nation with regard to the size, structure, and disposition of its military forces in order to comply with arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreements, and shall include, in the case of each agreement about which compliance questions exist-- ``(A) a description of each significant issue raised and efforts made and contemplated with the other participating state to seek resolution of the difficulty; ``(B) an assessment of damage, if any, to the United States security and other interests; and ``(C) recommendations as to any steps that should be considered to redress any damage to United States national security and to reduce compliance problems. ``(b) Classification of the Report.--The report required by this section shall be submitted in unclassified form, with classified annexes, as appropriate. ``AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS ``Sec. 52. (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out the purposes of this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated-- ``(1) $57,500,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $59,375,000 for fiscal year 1995; and ``(2) such additional amounts as may be necessary for each fiscal year for which an authorization of appropriations is provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection for increases in salary, pay, retirement, other employee benefits authorized by law, and other nondiscretionary costs, and to offset adverse fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. ``(b) Transfer of Funds.--Funds appropriated pursuant to this section may be allocated or transferred to any agency for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Such funds shall be available for obligation and expenditure in accordance with the authorities of this Act or in accordance with the authorities governing the activities of the agencies to which such funds are allocated or transferred. ``(c) Limitation.--Not more than 12 percent of any appropriation made pursuant to this Act shall be obligated or reserved during the last month of the fiscal year.''. (b) Effective Date.--So much of the amendment made by subsection (a) as inserts section 52 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act shall be deemed to have become effective as of October 1, 1993. SEC. 817. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS. (a) Section 2 (22 U.S.C. 2551) is amended-- (1) in the second undesignated paragraph, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``Arms control''; and (2) in the second and third undesignated paragraphs, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control'' each place it appears. (b) Section 28 (22 U.S.C. 2568) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``field of arms control and disarmament'' and inserting ``fields of arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament''; and (2) in the second sentence, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control''. (c) Section 31 (22 U.S.C. 2571) is amended-- (1) in the text above paragraph (a), by striking ``field of arms control and disarmament'' each of the three places it appears and inserting ``fields of arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament''; (2) in the first sentence, by inserting ``and nonproliferation'' after disarmament; and (3) in the fourth sentence, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after arms control each of the eight places it appears. (d) Section 35 (22 U.S.C. 2575) is amended by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control''. (e) Section 39 (22 U.S.C. 2579) is amended by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control'' each of the two places it appears. At the bottom of page 5, add the following: TITLE VIII--ARMS CONTROL AND NONPROLIFERATION ACT OF 1994 Sec. 801. Short title; references in title; table of contents. Sec. 802. Congressional declarations; purpose. Sec. 803. Purposes. Sec. 804. Repeals. Sec. 805. Director. Sec. 806. Bureaus, offices, and divisions. Sec. 807. Presidential special representatives. Sec. 808. Policy formulation. Sec. 809. Negotiation management. Sec. 810. Report on measures to coordinate research and development. Sec. 811. Negotiating records. Sec. 812. Verification of compliance. Sec. 813. Authorities with respect to nonproliferation matters. Sec. 814. Appointment and compensation of personnel. Sec. 815. Security requirements. Sec. 816. Annual report to Congress; authorization of appropriations. Sec. 817. Conforming amendments.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, this amendment is the same as S. 1182, a bill strongly endorsed by the Committee on Foreign Relations. This legislation has the full support of the Clinton administration. This important legislation will revitalize and strengthen the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency [ACDA] by clarifying its role in the national security structure, assigning ACDA major new responsibilities, and by redirecting its energies to the arms control challenges of the future. It would build upon the agency's solid core of professionals to re- create the Agency as the strong and forceful entity envisaged when ACDA was created in 1961 in the first year of the Kennedy administration. This act is the result of an excellent and continuing cooperation between the executive branch and the Congress. It represents a consensus as the best course for ACDA and it enjoys broad bipartisan support on the Hill, as well as the support of the administration. President, Secretary of State Christopher deserves particular credit for the time and attention be devoted to this issue, for his farsighted decision that ACDA should be strengthened and revitalized and for his recommendation along those lines to the President. President Clinton became directly involved in this issue, and it is to his strong credit that he recognized both the arms control challenges of the future and the critically important role ACDA can play in meeting these challenges. In 1991, the Committee on Foreign Relations, concerned by the reduced stature and effectiveness of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, approved unanimously an amendment offered by Senator Simon requiring a report by the State/ACDA inspector general, not later than December 15, 1992, with regard to the Agency's fulfillment of the primary functions specified in law. The amendment specified: Such report shall address the current ability and performance of the Agency in carrying out these functions and shall provide detailed recommendations for any changes in executive branch organization and direction needed to fulfill these primary functions. The inspector general, Sherman Funk, appointed a panel, led by Ambassador James F. Goodby, to prepare the report. After a wide-ranging and thorough effort, the report was submitted to President Bush and the requesting committees in December 1992. The panel judged that two concepts are most likely to promote U.S. national interests and meet the challenges of our changed world were either to refocus and rejuvenate ACDA as a separate agency or to fold it into the State Department. The panel opted for a reshaped and rejuvenated ACDA. Funk wrote: The review concluded that it remains important to the nation to have a specialized, technically competent, and independent arms control institution, and therefore recommends retaining a separate, but reorganized, refocused, and rejuvenated ACDA. I reviewed Sherman Funk's excellent report with great care. At the same time, I weighed the judgments in a comprehensive report prepared independently by the Henry L. Stimson Center, as well as related studies by others. It was clear from these assessments that ACDA could not go on as it was. It remained the only independent governmental Agency in the world devoted to arms control and it retained a solid corps of professionals, but it was in score need of nurturing. I concluded that we needed both to help it truly live up to its mandate and to give it new authorities so that it would not only have a seat at the arms control table, but a strong voice at the table. Accordingly, I directed the preparation of a draft bill that would strengthen the Agency and maintain its independence, and sent the bill to the National Security Council [NSC] for review. At the same time, at my direction, the committee staff worked with ACDA, State, and NSC officials to see whether common agreement on strengthening the Agency could be reached. Some in the Department of State favored absorption of ACDA by State. Others inside and outside the executive branch, however, preferred an independent role for ACDA. There was a general agreement that the proper choices were merger or revitalization and strengthening, but not the status quo. Those who favored absorption believed sincerely that there would be major cost savings. My own review indicated that the cost savings would only be realized by cutting people and capabilities. To realize the savings envisaged, experts in ACDA would have had to be put out on the street and with them their expert knowledge. According to a study by Steven A. Hildreth for the Congressional Research Service: . . . a new analysis of State's proposal suggests the estimated annual cost saving in the near term may only be about $3 million or less. This figure could vanish altogether if the State Department created new positions to replace those assumed to be abolished by the proposed transfer. Abolishing ACDA, therefore, is not likely to save money without a substantial RIF or statutory enactment. None of these analyses included the additional costs of shutting down ACDA. Moreover, according to the study: The major current alternative to the State Department's proposal is to attempt to strengthen or revitalize ACDA. Most of the proposals for revitalizing ACDA do not cost money. President, throughout this process of review and assessment, I worked closely with Secretary of State Christopher and the President's National Security Adviser, Anthony Lake. n July 3, 1993, the President, in a radio address to the Nation, called for the preservation and revitalization of ACDA. President Clinton stated: . . . I am also taking steps to revitalize the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, so that it can play an active role in meeting the arms control and nonproliferation challenges of this new era. I am committed to protecting our people, deterring aggression and combating terrorism. The work of combating proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is difficult and unending, but it is an essential part of this task. It must be done. On July 12, 1993, Secretary Christopher followed up the President's statement with a letter to me confirming the decision of the administration to revitalize ACDA. The Secretary wrote: The President and I are fully committed to a revitalized ACDA through a combination of strong ACDA leadership, internal agency changes, full participation of ACDA in Executive Branch policy making, and legislative changes. In response to the President's announcement and Secretary Christopher's letter, another series of discussions were held to resolve all outstanding differences before the bill went to mark up. These discussions were fruitful, and all issues were settled by September 14, 1993. On that date, National Security Adviser Anthony Lake expressed support for the act in a letter on behalf of the administration. The Arms Control and Non-Proliferation Act, as amended and favorably reported out of committee, has several key provisions. As described in the committee's report, the act: Codifies the President's decision of July 3, 1993, to retain and revitalize the Agency; Enhances the role of the ACDA in the areas of arms control and nonproliferation policy and negotiations in several ways: First, ACDA is given primary responsibility for all arms control negotiations and implementation fora, including any negotiation of a comprehensive nuclear test ban; second, positions for Presidential Special Representatives for Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament are created and placed under the ACDA Director; and third, ACDA's role in nonproliferation is underscored by giving the Agency primary responsibility for managing U.S. participation in the 1995 review conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and primary responsibility for other nonproliferation activities when so directed by the President; Improves ACDA's role regarding arms transfers and nonproliferation. ACDA is given mandatory prior consultation and review rights with respect to export licenses and other matters under both the Arms Export Control Act and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act; Streamlines the functions of the Agency by eliminating a number of outdated or redundant reporting requirements and by disbanding the General Advisory Committee, thereby permitting the Agency to reassign personnel to other substantive areas; and Authorizes the appropriation for fiscal year 1994 of $57,500,000 for ACDA and $59,375,000 for fiscal year 1995 for ACDA. President, in 1961 when I was a freshman Senator, I was privileged to go with the late Senator Joseph Clark and the late Senator Hubert H. Humphrey to the White House to discuss the status in the bureaucracy of the new arms control agency. We argued strongly that the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency should not be created by executive fiat, but rather should have the imprimatur of a statutory agency. The White House accepted our advice and shortly thereafter the new U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency was born. We hoped for a great deal, but to a certain degree our reach exceeded our grasp, and the Agency was never to have the clout and authority we hoped for at the start. You do not have opportunities always in life to fix those things that have not measured up to your expectations, but we fortunately have such an opportunity now with ACDA. We must remember that this is an agency that despite its adversities has shown great resolve and purpose that have redounded to the credit of the United States. It was because of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency that the United States was the leader of the effort to reach agreement on the critically important Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968. ACDA was in the lead of the effort to negotiate the ABM Treaty of 1972 and it remained steadfast in much adversity in its defense of that treaty in the mid-1980's so that it still remains the cornerstone of our strategic arms limitation effort. Through the Arms Control Agency's good offices the extraordinarily complex Chemical Weapons Convention has been achieved to complement the earlier Biological Weapons Convention, which the United States is adhering to because of ACDA's efforts. Many of the problems unique to the cold war have disappeared only to be replaced by new and urgent concerns. Central to the future arms control effort will be our own activities to stem the proliferation of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, and their means of delivery. The Arms Control and Nonproliferation Act gives the Arms Control Agency, its Director, and other senior ACDA officials substantially broadened authorities and responsibility in the nonproliferation area. We are trying to give ACDA some of the muscle it needs to have to ensure that it carries the necessary weight in the interagency deliberative process. I believe that this act will build upon ACDA's successes and the Agency's talents to give it the lead role in our arms control and nonproliferation efforts of the future. The Agency will lead in setting course and direction in arms control and nonproliferation, and I believe that it will be a very successful voyage into a future with many threats and challenges to be met. I do hope that we accept and pass this amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there further debate?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Chair recognizes the Senator from North Carolina [Helms].
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Does the Senator want to proceed now?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I am happy to wait. The Senator is going to address this amendment?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Yes, I say to my friend. President, thank you for recognizing me. The administration's strong endorsement of S. 1182, the ACDA reauthorization bill before us today, is indicative of a colossal downtown. The original State Department reorganization of the foreign policy decisionmaking apparatus was to send ACDA to the Federal bureaucracy scrap heap. That may be an indelicate way of saying it, but it is pretty accurate. The truth of the matter is that ACDA's stature and effectiveness have greatly diminished over the past 6 years. Certainly since the end of the cold war, ACDA has been an agency in search of a mission to justify its existence. ACDA is sort of a cold war dinosaur on an evolutionary slide to extinction. Every report or recent study conducted on the continued existence of ACDA has concluded ACDA was never the dynamic, energetic, or critically important policy adviser to the President and Secretary of State originally envisioned in 1961. Matter of fact, this agency has never played the critical mission, been the independent decisive information broker or the policy confidant to the President and key arms control decisionmakers in the executive branch. Granted, the agency has had its moments and played an important role in the past 33 years--for example, the Non-Proliferation Act of 1968, negotiation of the 1972 ABM Treaty, and the Chemical and Biological Weapons Convention. But the fact remains that ACDA was an unwanted congressional appendage, affixed to the executive branch by legislative fiat. Consequently, the Agency has been treated like an unwanted stepchild for years. As Chairman Pell points out, the Agency was never to have the clout and authority we hoped for from the start. Even ACDA's greatest accomplishments were achieved under the watchful eyes and guiding hands of NSC's Policy Planning Coordination Committee, the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Department of Energy, the CIA, the DIA, and a plethora of advisers, consultants, and academicians on the U.S. payroll. The fact is ACDA was always on the outside looking in on policy decisions. Even with ACDA, there was the ``Un Group.'' This was an unofficial group of key ACDA analysts and specialist who provided unofficial guidance to the real policymakers because formal recommendations from ACDA were so slow to emerge and were never listened to. For these and other reasons, the Clinton administration originally endorsed and supported the recommendation contained in the Bush administration study, ``State 2000,'' to abolish ACDA and fold its functions into the State Department and other related departments where appropriate. Before Secretary Designate Christopher had the benefit of congressional foresight, he was advocating and recommending termination of ACDA, but he did an about face when he discovered in Executive hindsight that it was much easier to discuss the positive aspects of ACDA from the vantage point as a confirmed Secretary of State. Whatever the reason for the administration's reversal of direction, it was dramatic. I think the administration should thank Chairman Pell and other Senators for the administration's new found cooperative insight. Everyone can quote their own study on this issue, but some of the original cost saving estimates--State 2000 and GAO--were that a major reorganization could save almost half of the ACDA budget--$25 million per year, or one quarter of a billion dollars in 10 years. That is a lot of money to spend on an agency in search of an identity. Every study I have seen has clearly stated that ACDA cannot continue under its existing mandate--either reshape it or abolish it. One study said, contrary to a previous study, that ``a new analysis . . . suggests . . . an estimated cost saving in the near term may only be $3 million.'' CRS further stated: ``Abolishing ACDA, therefore, is not likely to save money without a substantial RIF--reduction in force--or statutory enactment.'' Even with shutdown costs--I call termination of an agency a substantial long-term RIF, saving millions of taxpayer funds. The same CRS study said, ``the major current alternative to the State Department's proposal is to attempt to strengthen or revitalize ACDA. Most proposals for revitalizing ACDA do not cost money.'' The last finding appealed to me. I offered an amendment in committee to reduce the ACDA budget by 8 percent, or $5 million, from $62.5 million to $57.5 million in 1994. Based on acceptance of my amendment, I supported reporting out S. 1182, the ACDA authorization bill. I found this bill deficient in several respects. But quite frankly, I found the state Department's original proposal of folding ACDA and related functions into State similarly deficient. I have always thought the Department of Defense should have the final say in whether or not the proliferation or export of certain high technologies are detrimental to the national security interests of the United States. Second, ACDA's integration into State should be at the Undersecretary level and encompass the responsibilities of ACDA, parts of the Political and Military Bureau, the Office of Ambassador-at-Large for Proliferation, and other offices. This way the person responsible for nonproliferation would be on the inside of the policymaking process, and would carry a big stick to boot. But this is not where we are. I think we should watch this new organization like a good bird dog hunts--with a keen nose and good eyes. I am not convinced that the organizational structure of ACDA has found the proper balance. ACDA currently has a fine Director, but I am concerned that ACDA's success may depend more on the personal relationship of Holum and Secretary Christopher than on the so- called ``revitalized and strengthened'' authorities in this bill. I feel we should wish Holum well but keep a close eye on the future of ACDA. I thank the Chair and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Illinois is recognized. Simon.
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  President, I thank you. President, I rise in support of the amendment. I am pleased to be a cosponsor of it. I was not on the floor when it came up, but I heard Senator Helms, my friend from North Carolina, say at the end we have to keep a close eye. We have to do that on everything in Government. That includes particularly things that have such a vital part in the future, such as things that concern security. I was pleased to join Senator Pell in cosponsoring this to try to give ACDA, frankly, some new life. The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency has been a weak sister. Let us face it. And with rare exception it just has not had any kind of muscle. The idea of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency was that here would be an entity that could come in, and whether it was a question of proliferation, whether it was a question of conventional arms, whatever it would be, there would be an entity that could question whether it makes sense to increase arms sales or grants to any area of the world or to any country. The difficulty in this area of arms sales and grants is that those who manufacture, understandably, are interested in getting their products out wherever they can, and sometimes that is not in the interest either of the United States or of the country or countries involved. I would particularly like to commend Senator Pell, who has shown leadership in the area of education, and who has shown a sensitivity in this whole area of foreign relations. The Presiding Officer, the distinguished Senator from Virginia, Senator Robb, sits on the Foreign Relations Committee. There are probably a few occasions when I have voted differently from Senator Pell on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, but not very many. One of the reasons is that I find myself in general agreement with him, and the second is I trust his judgment. And when it is a marginal call, frankly, Senator Pell through the years has learned some practical things. One of the things he has learned is that we have to reinvigorate ACDA. He is one of those who helped to create this entity. I think his amendment is a step in the right direction. I am pleased to be here and to join in supporting it. I yield the floor, President.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Rhode Island, Senator Pell.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  President, I thank the Senator from Illinois for his very kind remarks. He is correct; I do take great interest in ACDA since it was in 1961 when we made the decision to make it a statutory body and not set up by Executive order. President, I ask that when we come to vote on this issue, we have a rollcall vote. I ask for the yeas and nays.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there a sufficient second? There is a sufficient second . The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, as the Chair well knows, this is an issue which we discussed at some length within the committee about where to go with ACDA. It is fair to say that it has disappointed a lot of people's expectations over the years for a lot of different reasons, not the least of which was during a certain period of time we had the administration that was not particularly concerned about arms control and consciously tried to move the agency off to the side. Other things have conspired to make it difficult for the Agency to be able to perform. I would like to congratulate the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Pell, because I think if there is any issue that he has identified with and which he has cared about throughout his years in the Senate, it is the issue of proliferation. He has constantly shown leadership in the effort to try to guarantee not only that we have a strong ACDA, but that we have other initiatives in an effort to rein in the incredible increase in the proliferation of weapons, not just nuclear proliferation, but the general weapons of warfare. As Senator Pell has served on the Arms Control Observer Group during those critical years of the cold war when that was particularly active, he has consistently pushed this issue. I know how hard he has worked to frame a new structure for ACDA and a new dynamic within which, hopefully, we can address the growing proliferation issues that we face, I might add the important complex proliferation issues that we face in the wake of the changes with the demise of the Soviet Union. The question of control over both tactical and strategic weapons, the process of destruction, the questions of the defense arrangement, security arrangements with which we will address the new NATO, and the Partnership for Peace, all of these are very significant. And to have a revitalized ACDA in that context I think embodies a lot of our hopes, all of us, that we are going to have an agency and an entity that really can frame these issues and assist the President in putting good choices in front of the Congress and the American people. So I congratulate the chairman of the committee. I hope that this effort to revitalize ACDA will bear fruit. President, I do not think there is any further debate.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I believe he has the yeas and nays on the amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there further debate?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the yeas and nays be vitiated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I do not believe there is further debate.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there further debate? If not, the question is on agreeing to the amendment of the Senator from Rhode Island, Pell. The amendment (No.1250) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the amendment was agreed to.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that it be in order to ask for the yeas and nays on amendment No. 1248.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, if I could just reserve the right to object----
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The request is in order at this time. The pending business of the Senate at this point is amendment No. 1248 offered by the Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I ask for the yeas and nays.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there a sufficient second? There is a sufficient second. The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I thank the chair. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Boxer). Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the pending amendment of the Senator from North Carolina be temporarily set aside.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. amendment no. 1251 and amendment no. 1252, en bloc
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I send two amendments to the desk on behalf of Senator Glenn and ask for their immediate consideration, en bloc. The PRESIDENT OFFICER. The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Massachusetts [Kerry], on behalf of Glenn, proposes amendments numbered 1251 and 1252, en bloc.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendments be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendments are as follows: amendment no. 1251 (Purpose: To eliminate the provisions relating to an Inspector General of the Department of State and the Foreign Service, and for other purposes) On pages 2 and 3 strike out the items relating to sections 136 through 140 and insert in lieu thereof the following: Sec. 136. Refugee affairs. Sec. 137. Office of foreign missions. Sec. 138. Women's human rights protection. Sec. 139. Repeals. On page 41, beginning on line 5, strike out all through line 3 on page 42. On page 42, line 4, strike out ``SEC. 137.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 136.'' On page 43, line 22, strike out ``SEC. 138.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 137.''. On page 46, line 7, strike out ``SEC. 139.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 138.'' On page 46, line 20, strike out ``SEC. 140.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 139.'' ____ amendment no. 1252 At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: Sense of the Senate.--It is the Sense of the Senate that-- (a) There is a growing concern among some of the Members of this body that the unlimited terms of Office of Inspectors General in federal agencies may be undesirable, therefore, (b) The issue of amending the Inspector General Act to establish term limits for Inspectors General should be examined and considered as soon as possible by the appropriate committees of jurisdiction.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, in the current section 136 of the bill that the committee has submitted, there is a 6-year term limit in the position of the State Department inspectors general. This amendment was adopted as part of the en bloc package within the full committee markup, and it was offered by Senator Helms because of concern over the inspector general's performance, and that concern was shared particularly by Senator Dodd and by other Senators on the committee. After the bill was reported, Senator Glenn, as chairman of the Governmental Affairs Committee, contacted us and expressed some concern about the jurisdictional issue of the Governmental Affairs Committee and this particular amendment. I might say to the Chair and to my colleagues that the Foreign Relations Committee clearly has jurisdiction over the State Department's inspector general, and that is established in the Foreign Service Act of 1980. The committee simultaneously recognizes the Governmental Affairs Committee's interest in and jurisdiction over the question of inspectors general within certain agencies and departments of the Government. Therefore, we have worked out a compromise, which these two amendments represent. The first amendment strikes section 136, dealing with the term of the inspector general's service, and the second amendment adds a new section at the appropriate place in the bill which expresses the sense of the Senate regarding unlimited terms for inspectors general. We adopted this section because, frankly, a number of Members on the committee were very concerned about this sort of open-ended potential for service, a kind of life tenure, if you will, without, in our feelings, sufficient performance to merit that or oversight capacity. So, Senator Glenn has now assured the committee that he is going to address this question of term limits for inspectors general in upcoming hearings with possible amendments to the Inspector General Act. And he has indicated his personal support for the sense-of-the-Senate language which urges the examination of the term limit question by the appropriate committee as early as possible. So in light of this, the committee is prepared, and has agreed, I think, to delete the section 136 language and add the sense-of-the- Senate language. I urge adoption of these amendments, en bloc.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, I confess that it is with hesitation and reservation, but with full respect of the Senator from Massachusetts, that I support the amendment of Senator Kerry. I should make it a matter of record that I have not been in agreement with the thrust of this amendment. The Senator's amendment, for reasons he has explained, deletes the current provision to establish a 6-year term limit on inspectors general and replace it with a watered-down, sense-of-the-Senate language, noting that some of us are concerned about the unlimited terms of some executive branch inspectors general. As the Senator has explained--and he did so very clearly--there was a debate over the turf aspect of this question. I have all the respect in the world for Senator Glenn. I have, on occasion, stood up for my committee's turf. So we agreed to let this issue rest until the Senate debates the Inspector General Act of 1980 later this year. As my friend from Massachusetts has indicated, the original provision was bipartisan and cooperative, in terms of an effort on the part of the members of the committee, demonstrated by the fact that this provision was included in an en bloc package of amendments prior to the committee markup of a bill. It may sound complicated, but it really is not. I contend to this moment that the Foreign Relations Committee has had and will continue to have jurisdiction over the inspector general for the State Department. It was our committee that created the position in the Foreign Service Act of 1980. No question about that. It is our committee, the Foreign Relations Committee, that receives the IG reports. We are the Senators who know whether or not the inspector general is performing up to par. Therefore, on the jurisdictional issue, with all due respect, I must beg to differ with my colleagues who want to claim the jurisdiction for their committees. Since the current inspector general announced his retirement a few weeks ago, the original language of section 136 loses just a bit of its urgency. However, I do hope that later this year the Senator from Ohio [Glenn] will take up the issue of term limits for inspectors general. I commend my colleague from Massachusetts for his amendment, and I support it fully at this point. I regret that he had to offer, or felt obliged to offer, a watered down version. But we can get to that later and take care of it. I thank the Chair, and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, let me say I could not agree with my colleague more. He understands the situation. I understand the situation. We are bowing to the necessities of jurisdiction, and we respect that. We would probably--not probably; we would ask the same thing. But I think both the Senator and I do not want, and others concerned with it do not want, a lot of time elapsing, or this to become somehow a permissiveness for this egregious situation to not somehow be addressed. I certainly commit to the Senator that we will join together in guaranteeing that that is not the situation. I do not believe there is any further debate, Madam President.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  If there is no further debate, the question is on agreeing to the amendments, en bloc. The amendments (Nos. 1251 and 1252), en bloc, were agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the amendments were agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The absence of a quorum has been noted. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is PRESSLER and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is PRESSLER and he says  Madam President, I rise to say that on this State Department authorization bill, I shall be active in supporting amendments that would push toward reform of the United Nations. I believe the Secretary General should appoint an Inspector General at the United Nations. It has seemed very strange to me that after many years of audits that have consistently reported mismanagement and corruption within the U.N.'s bureaucracy, very little has been done to clean it up from a management point of view. I know that management is one of the dullest of subjects. I happen to believe, for example, that Congress should hold a whole session of oversight hearings rather than legislating new agencies and legislating new programs. I think we should make the Government that is already established work to our advantage. Within our various Departments, we have an inspector general who roots out corruption and finds if funds are being misused. The American taxpayers pay nearly 35 percent, if you add it all up, of the expenses of the United Nations. Indeed, I am for our being in the United Nations. I have always been pro-United Nations. I think the United Nations has a role to play, but that role is crippled when we cannot deliver supplies, when we cannot deliver food without it being stolen and resold in the streets the next morning. Various regional headquarters of the United Nations receive medical materials, we are subsequently told they were stolen out of the warehouses and the next day they are for sale on the black market. There have been a variety of United Nations internal audits that have pinpointed individuals and offices that have engaged in thievery and corruption, not to mention just bad management. The time has come for the American taxpayers to be assured that the United Nations is interested in reform and good management. It has long been my feeling that the State Department has been too soft in terms of pushing for reform at the United Nations. The U.S. delegation to the United Nations under both Republican and Democratic Presidents thinks of itself, basically, as a diplomatic mission and does not emphasize management reform. We did get Dick Thornburgh appointed to be the number two manager within the United Nations, but he was fired after a year and the report he wrote was shredded. No copies are available. Thornburgh, the former Governor of Pennsylvania, has spoken on this subject a good deal. So we have a situation in which our taxpayers are asking us what is going on? One of the amendments that I shall offer would require that an Inspector General be appointed or our contributions will decrease. I know that I have worked closely with Senator Dole, the Republican leader, on a package of amendments for reform at the United Nations I think most Americans support our involvement in the United Nations. We hope the United Nations can carry out missions of peace and delivery of food and medicine throughout the world. We hope the United Nations can be an instrument for peace, but we think it will be a better United Nations if there are management reforms. Madam President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that there be a period for morning business, with Senators permitted to speak therein for up to 10 minutes each.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is WALLOP and he says  President, I received these letters during the debate on the rangeland reform measures in the 1994 Interior Appropriations bill. When they were submitted to the Congressional Record as part of the debate, they were not printed in their complete form. I would like to resubmit them now, so they can be appreciated in their entirety. There being no objection, the letters were ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Sun Land and Cattle Co., Hub and Spoke Ranch Co., Rawlins, WY, October 20, 1993. Open Letter to Secretary Babbitt and Jim Baca: As ranchers, our backs are to the wall and our lives are passing before our eyes. Our destiny seems to rest on Malcolm Wallop and his ability to avoid cloture and filibuster the appropriations bill that contains the death sentence for the Western livestock industry as we know it. A segment of people in this country want an end to livestock grazing on Federal lands. That is a given. Right now those people have the upper hand. The stated goal of the Clinton administration in proposing ``rangeland reform '94'' is to alleviate the ``poor'' condition of the Western range. Let's take them at their word and assume they really want to improve rangeland conditions. Each range is different. Each allotment is unique. Each should be studied by range conservationists in complete cooperation with the rancher involved. The type of soil, topography, vegetation, precipitation and climate, including micro-climates, wind direction, etc. must be considered. There are many things that can be done that are productive, at least as long as it rains. As an example, Dr. Alan Savery has had great success with his holistic resource management techniques. Intensive grazing, when thoroughly understood and done properly can produce astounding results. Let's use it on Federal land. The rating system used by BLM, at least in this area, is very inadequate. While I understand the system is being changed, or is going to be, it has resulted in very misleading ratings in many areas. Many species, even though native, are not listed in the technical guide, so their presence gives no rating. Other species, many highly desirable, give negative ratings because they are not considered ``native'' to this particular area. Whether they are or not, is not always positively known. The percentage of species allowed in each type of soil seems to be set in stone. Over 30% sagebrush in sandy soil will produce a poor rating even though old pioneer journals recount how the brush was so tall and thick 150 years ago as to almost stop their wagons from proceeding. And these are the areas that are critical winter habitat for antelope. Areas with an abundance and wide variety of woody species are given lower ratings, yet are excellent deer habitat. Too many willows with little diversity along a stream produces a poor rating, yet is great for moose. The desirability of habitat for wildlife is not considered in this rating system. If the range is to be rated strictly on biodiversity and forage for cattle and sheep, let's reseed it to what is desired. We know it can be done with great success, as long as we get moisture. O.K. Let's be realistic. Those two options probably won't happen. Not right away. We know the powers that be want us off the Federal land. A June 23 memo from assistants Kevin Sweeney and Lucia Wyman to Secretary of the Interior Babbitt, Jim Baca and Tom Collier stated, ``Our own statistics can be used to show the range is in better shape than at any point in this century. With that in mind, we must make deliberate and public attempts to prove how bad the conditions are in many riparian areas.'' In other words, ``Our arguments are lies so we must really push them.'' So if they want us off Federal land I have three suggestions. Ranchers should be given a choice: 1. Buy us out. Just the ranch, not the cattle. That includes paying for our private land, our improvements on Federal land and the grazing permits that we bought and paid hard money for before we ever got to the grazing fee, and on which we have been taxed. Get a fair appraisal of pre-Mike Synar prices and buy us out. A few years ago there was a dairy buy-out. The Government bought quite a few dairy herds. Enough to wreck the cattle market for a while. Vermont Senator Jim Jeffords said he wanted his dairy farmers to be able to ``retire with dignity.'' We would like to do the same rather than start over in our ``golden years.'' 2. Instead of buying us out, buy a private land ranch-- probably in another state--of equivalent value and trade us. We'll just move our cows. 3. Swap private and Federal land in the checkerboard areas so ranchers there could get off the Federal land and block up the private land. This would provide pastures with strictly private holdings and large blocks of Federal and with no private land intermingled. Of course, it would provide the rancher with just half of the pasture he had before. He would have to be compensated for his grazing permits and improvements, at the very least. 4. Small Federal land parcels surrounded by private lands should be sold at a nominal cost to the owners of the surrounding lands. These small pieces are always bare, rocky hills or an equivalent. That is why no one took title to them. Last, but probably most important, let's use real science instead of psuedo-science where the procedures are tailored to fit the desired outcome. ____ Boulder, WY, October 20, 1993. Senator Malcolm Wallop, Russell Senate Office Building, Washington, DC. Dear Senator Wallop: Hello, my name is Suzy Michnevich. I am one of three working partners on our cattle ranch in Sublette County, Wyoming. We own 3,083 deeded acres. We also hold one state school section and a 583 AUM Forest Service lease most of which is on the Bridger Wilderness and 1,043 AUMs of Bureau of Land Management leases located in two tracts, one 14 miles southwest of and the other two miles northeast of our deeded land. We have approximately 1,000 cattle, 20 horses, several herds of antelope, deer, elk, and a few moose, many birds, rabbits, rodents, trout, and three families including six children for which we feel responsible. My great-grandfather took excellent care of his and the government's land by being instrumental in the formation of the New Fork East Fork Grazing Association in 1902. Today, we are still members of this association which is committed to the conservation of our resources. So much so that in 1992 our association was nominated by the U.S. Forest Service for a stewardship award. My family is involved in agriculture for the long haul. For as long as we can afford to raise cattle, we will do so. We raise our children beside us feeding cattle, moving cattle, irrigating, fixing fences, and putting up hay. My son spent his first two years with me in a backpack or in a truck or tractor, not in daycare. He is taught our work ethic and our morals from before sunup to after sundown. He is not raised by someone else. Now as a kindergartner, he reflects this by going to school and enjoying his classmates and taking his classwork seriously. He is one confident little boy. My husband is a carpenter and works away from the ranch as does my sister-in-law. We could not make ends meet were it not for their outside jobs. Both of them help on the ranch when they can. Our deeded ranch land along with the state and federal leases has a greater carrying capacity than we now utilize so we are in the painful process of rebuilding. Each partner receives $800 per month. we are working toward increasing this salary in the near future. Along with the outside jobs mentioned, our families live on this amount of money without welfare, free school lunches, or free health care. Our lives are rich in other rewards besides money. We do, however, have a breaking point. Ranching in northwestern Wyoming is difficult at best. Profit margins are very thin. Every day we wage war with weather we cannot change and disease. We have made enormous strides with animal health, but if our neighbors do not take the same precautions we do, then our animals' health can be in jeopardy. We have to count on our ranching neighbors to do the right thing not only for themselves personally but for us also. In our community they do for the most part. We work together even though we all have differences of opinion concerning ranching practices, i.e. different types of haying operations, horses vs. mechanization, fertilizer usage, and how much water is used to irrigate a particular piece of ground. We do, however, all agree on the following points: 1. We are opposed to overgrazing and try to improve our resource which is grass. We have been excellent stewards of the land. 2. Families are the mainstay of the ranching industry. Our children need to know they can continue to make a decent living in agriculture. 3. We all enjoy wildlife and enjoy providing habitat for them, however, if cost and regulations cause us to abandon leases, the wildlife and hunters who chase them will no longer be welcome visitors. My family is among fourth-generation ranchers in the East Fork valley, but we see changes occurring. A few of our neighbors have had financial problems and decided to sell out. Our new neighbors, not having the experience of four generations, have made stewardship errors that make our peers in the community cringe. Some have decided not to raise cattle, allowing the land to go fallow. Some have decided to keep cattle but do not realize the work, feed, and care necessary to raise cattle at an elevation of 7,200 feet. It takes years for them to learn to shift priorities from their own personal comfort to their animals' care. Newcomers do not allow fishing or hunting on their properties even to those visitors polite enough to ask permission. I have noticed that the cowboy mystique wears off within a few years after purchase and for-sale signs go up. To whom will these places be sold? The serious livestock raisers cannot afford to pay land prices that have been inflated by sale after sale. Is this valley doomed to become an unproductive vacation spot for the wealthy who put their own personal interests first? Each year our land taxes increase because of inflated land values caused by our new neighbors' ability to buy land that cannot pay for itself through production. Due to these continually inflating prices, the land must be sold again and again at an ever higher price eventually to someone who will subdivide or to someone who is just a part-time resident and who does not feel the need to become a responsible member of the community. If a substantial grazing-fee increase is voted into law, it will be one more nail in the ranching industry's coffin. If petty regulations designed to assist in the demise of ranchers using and paying for federal lands are also voted in, then each one of those will be yet another nail in that same coffin. This community and our local town of Pinedale has a stable economy augmented by agriculture. if agriculture is removed so will a year-around economic stabilizer. Ranching provides not only a safe, economical food source but also responsible community members and a recreational resource to those who respect us and our land. I feel a large grazing-fee increase and increased regulations are the government's solution to rid themselves of users of federal lands. When the cattle go, the grass will go also. The ability to graze on federal lands has allowed us to improve this resource. Private grazing leases are virtually unavailable and should be put on the endangered species list. Honorable Senators, please try to understand western ranching practices before you vote for something that could devastate an entire industry in the western states. Before you decide and vote, I invite you to come see our ranch and stay with my family. Come see and understand our industry firsthand. I invite any of you to come any time. My address is 88 Scab Creek Road, Boulder, Wyoming. We can all survive and prosper together. Thank you. Sincerely, Suzy Michnevich. ____ October 19, 1993. Dear Senator Wallop: The last gasp letter is written on behalf of ourselves and especially our relatives and neighbors who have a longer heritage of sheep and cattle ranching on the west side of the Big Horn mountains. Several participated in the Bozeman, MT hearing held by Secretary Babbitt and responded in writing as he requested, and again in response to ``Rangeland Reform `94.'' None of us are against a fair increase in grazing fees and all want to continue to improve rangeland conditions. We sincerely believed in July that the current Administration would sort out fact from rhetoric, as Secretary Babbitt repeatedly stated. The facts would speak for themselves, and we assumed he would work with the western states, governors, local communities and others through the hearing process. It is now obvious we were wrong. The Administration has become increasingly arrogant and clearly intends to increase fees by 125% and implement new regulations designed to force many small business ranchers into liquidation. Babbitt concealed his true agenda while in the West. He obviously planned all along to drastically reduce livestock grazing on public lands as part of the political payback commitments to the new big business environmental groups. Many of us were naive to believe the Interior Department appointees would do what is right for our country, and that jobs would be considered somewhat important. Unless you and your fellow senators are successful in achieving a commonsense compromise that establishes a fair fee system and responsible regulation changes through the EIS process, you can be assured that up to one-third of western federal land livestock producers will be out of business in 3 years. Up to 50,000 jobs will be lost only to be exported. Imports of boxed beef will increase by over 300 million pounds per year with an equivalent annual increase in the deficit. Social impact and welfare payment increases of another $400 million per year are the last thing our country needs at this time. All for what--a $30 million maximum increase in annual fees and questionable environmental improvement. If this keeps up, our economy will collapse. Jim and Virginia Foreman. ____________________
 
The speaker is THURMOND and he says  President, I want to take this opportunity to welcome back my colleagues and to wish everyone a healthy and rewarding new year. This will be a challenging session; however, I am optimistic that it will be a productive one which will achieve historic legislation on crime and health care. President, it should be no surprise to any of us that despite the absence of the Congress, life in the Nation's Capitol continues. During the past 2 months, I had the opportunity to participate in two ceremonies during which I was privileged to hear several noteworthy speeches. I want to share three of those statements with the Senate and ask that they be included in the Record immediately following this statement. The first statement is by our distinguished House colleague, the Honorable Ike Skelton. Representative Skelton spoke at the 357th birthday celebration of the National Guard. His statement is notable not only for its praise of the National Guard, but also for its visionary view on the future of NATO. The second statement is by the Honorable Togo West, the Secretary of the Army, at his welcoming ceremony at Fort Meyer, VA. Secretary West simply and eloquently outlined his goals to provide our Nation the best trained and ready Army in its history. Finally, I submit Gen. Gordon Sullivan's statement welcoming Secretary West. As the Army's senior military officer, General Sullivan graciously spoke on behalf of the Army's over 1 million men and women and their families in tribute to Secretary West. President, I hope my colleagues will take a moment to become familiar with these statements. Each of these men will have a prominent role as we deal with the Nation's problems during the coming months. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: The 357th Birthday of the National Guard--An Address By Congressman Ike Skelton I. Introduction It is a pleasure to be with you today on this 357th anniversary of the National Guard. Let me thank Major General Rees for the honor he has done me by his kind invitation to address this group today. It is also a pleasure to see Major General Killey and General * * * Allow me to also say how much of a pleasure it is to see a very special friend of mine and of the National Guard--The Honorable Deborah Lee, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs. Debbie is doing a very good job in the Pentagon and to make the total force better than ever. Her efforts are already beginning to bear fruit as the agreement announced this past Friday on restructuring the Army Guard and Reserve. I have not seen the details yet, so I will reserve judgment on the agreement. But anytime you can get the active Army, the National Guard and the Army Reserve singing from the same sheet of music that has to be counted as positive. My favorite Assistant Secretary earlier this year gave a speech in which she said ``The total force is no longer a concept but a reality.'' I believe she is right. I hope last week's agreement means we will no longer have an us vs. them attitude between active and reserve component forces. Active, Guard, and Reserve partisans must work together to help put a brake to the free fall in defense spending. That will be a very difficult task in today's budget climate. Past differences cannot be allowed to continue among the various components. All of us who want a strong national defense, a capable military--active and reserve--need to work together. I hope last week's agreement will help us toward that goal. Debbie, keep up the good work. ii. anniversaries 357th Birthday of National Guard Today, we celebrate the 357th birthday of the National Guard. By my arithmetic that means that the year of the birth of the National Guard was 1636, more than a century before this Nation declared its independence from Great Britain. Despite the break that eventually took place between the American colonies and Great Britain. The Guard still retains a number of the customs that came from both the English and the colonial American militia traditions. England's geographic position as an island separated from the European continent guaranteed its security from invasion. The need that other continental countries felt to maintain large standing armies was largely absent in England. It was able to man its armies with contingents raised locally and commanded by the local nobility. Equally important, such units were called to service on a temporary basis to respond to an immediate crisis. For example, at Tilbury in 1585, Elizabeth I reviewed such a militia brought together to resist an invasion of England threatened by the approach of the Spanish armada. Those hardy souls who made the voyage across the Atlantic in the early seventeenth century took with them the traditions of the mother country including the militia system. The first colonists were few in number, ignorant of the new land to which they had come, and highly vulnerable to attack from native inhabitants. The militia concept, actively implemented and rigidly enforced in the first decades of colonization after 1607, helped ensure the survival of the tiny English communities from some of the most savage Indian wars in American history. The American colonial militias relied on local recruiting, short period of active duty in response to immediate threats, and territorial restrictions on service. The essential features of that early period are still part of the Guard today. 75th Anniversary of World War I This year is also the 75th anniversary of the end of World War I, long known as the Great War. Last month I gave a speech in Missouri in which I recalled the great contributions of Missourians who distinguished themselves throughout our Nation's history. One of those Missourians was Harry S Truman. As those in this audience know, Harry Truman served in the National Guard in that conflict. As a boy he had decided that he wanted to be a military man, although he was afraid of a gun and would rather run than fight. He had originally enlisted in the Guard on June 14, 1905, Flag Day, at the age of 21. Twelve years later, he was still in the Guard. Though he was beyond the draft age, was operating a 600 acre farm, and had an oil lease on 320 acres of land, he left all this to join the artillery. He was motivated by a spirit of deep patriotism. He sailed to France aboard the USS George Washington, on Good Friday 1918. After a voyage of 12 to 13 days, he arrived in Brest. Soon after his arrival, his regiment, the 129th Field Artillery embarked upon a 6 week training course. Promoted to Captain, he commanded Battery D, and took it into action in August, participating in the Meuse-Argonne offensive until October 3. He saw further action in the Verdun sector from October 16 to November 7 and yet again in the Meuse-Argonne from November 7 until November 11 when the Armistice went into effect. He returned from France in April 1919 and left service in May. Yet the following year, he accepted appointment as a Major of Field Artillery in the Officer's Reserve Corps. He attained the rank of Colonel, commanding a field artillery regiment in July 1932. He attended summer military camp every year but one from 1923 to 1933. Years later he said ``I've always been sorry I did not get a university education in the regular way. But I got it in the army the hard way--and it stuck.'' iii. future of nato As we celebrate the birthday of the National Guard and recall Harry Truman's role as a member of the Guard in World War I, it is also appropriate to take some of those lessons of history and apply them today. After Harry Truman and his fellow veterans came home after World War I, the United States entered a period of isolationism. We resisted involvement in the affairs of the world, and did so at our own expense. After the defeat of the axis powers in 1945, the specter of Soviet communism threatened a prostrate Western Europe. At the time, the United States was the only Democratic country with the military and economic resources able to thwart the aims of the Soviet Union in Western Europe. Through the policy of containment the United States vigorously resisted this new threat. The Truman doctrine, which provided military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey in 1947, was soon followed by the Marshall Plan, which provided economic relief to the rest of Europe. The signing of the NATO agreement in 1949 committed the military power of the United States to the defense of Western Europe. The generation that had come to power in the 1940s was determined not to repeat the mistakes of the 1920s and 1930s: Isolationism did not guarantee peace; appeasement only encouraged dictators. As the Soviets sought to gain elsewhere what they were unable to achieve in Western Europe, this high stakes contest between the two superpowers spread to virtually every region of the world--from Europe to Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. The cost was considerable, close to 100,000 American lives in two Asian wars. However, I believe that we can take a certain measure of pride in our accomplishments. Like Atlas, we shouldered our burdens well. Areas of the world that were completely devastated were soon on the way to economic recovery due to a combination of American generosity and self-interest. Western Europe is strong, vigorous, and prosperous, as is that island nation on the other side of the globe, Japan. Europe and Japan prospered as a result of the far-reaching economic, diplomatic, and military policies adopted by the Truman administration and supported by every American administration thereafter. Elsewhere in East Asia, a credible argument can be made that the sacrifices made by the United States in Vietnam were not in vain. True, despite our considerable efforts, Indochina fell--Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. And yet, I believe that the period of our involvement in Vietnam bought time for the other countries of southeast Asia. If some of the dominoes fell, not all of them did. Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia had time to develop and strengthen themselves politically and economically. As members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN] their average economic rate of growth in the decade after 1975 was 7 percent in real terms, twice the global average. Today East Asia has replaced Western Europe as America's leading overseas trading partner. Very few would have predicted such a development in 1965. Today, there is a great debate concerning the future of NATO. It succeeded in its original purpose--defending Western Europe against the Soviet threat. That threat disappeared 2 years ago. This coming January President Clinton and the political leaders of other NATO countries will meet in Brussels to decide the future of history's most successful alliance. A key issue that will be discussed is NATO's enlargement. Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia are actively seeking membership in NATO. They are properly concerned about developments in Russia, especially the Russian military's new doctrine that seeks to re-establish Russian control over the former Soviet Union. The recent meetings over the past 2 weeks by NATO foreign and defense officials have led to the endorsement of the policy known as Partnership for Peace. It is an effort to give hope to those Central European countries wanting to become NATO members without offending Russian leaders, especially in the military establishment, who are suspicious of an expansionist western military alliance. No countries are named no timetables offered for those wanting to join NATO. But the door is left opened. Having studied the matter at some length, I believe that the Partnership for Peace Program is a good start but it must be part of a broader effort. First, explicit criteria for membership should be listed: a stable functioning democracy, protection of minority rights, civilian control of the military, open and detailed defense budgets. Second, I believe the inclusion of Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia in NATO would actually increase stability in Eastern Europe. Much the way the Soviet Union acceded to unified Germany becoming part of NATO, I believe Russia could be convinced that the inclusion of the four Central European countries in NATO would be in its interest also. Third, various NATO committees should be employed to increase contacts among the countries now in NATO, those in Central Europe wanting to join, and those in the Soviet successor states, namely committees dealing with economics, scientific affairs, environmental issues, airspace coordination, and civil emergency planning. iv. conclusion Some may wonder how we convince an American public that NATO remains important even after the cold war has ended. Twice this century we became involved in European wars despite our intentions to stay out. During the period of time that we have been a European power, with troops stationed in Europe, Europe has experienced its longest period of peace since Roman times. I believe Americans can be convinced that it is in our strategic interest to remain in Europe, to remain in NATO. The American National Guard, being part of the total force, should be just as interested in the NATO process as its active duty counterparts. Peace--just as conflict--affects all who wear the uniform. So let's follow the work and developments in progress. If it is successful, and peace in Europe continues, the Harry Trumans of Tomorrow will not have to bear the burden of freedom and security in another European conflict. Again, congratulations on the anniversary of America's National Guard. It has been and will long remain a steady rock of our Nation's freedom. ____ Remarks of the Honorable Togo D. West, Jr.--Welcoming Ceremony Thank you, General Sullivan, for those extremely gracious comments and for your warm introduction. A special thanks as well to the members of the Old Guard and the Army Band who have participated here. The men and women of America's Army around the world are certainly well represented by you here today, and we in the West family are especially appreciative of your efforts, as well as the efforts of the entire Army community in making us feel welcome and at home. We are proud to return to the Army and to join its leadership team, and we look forward to our association with you. Deputy Secretary Perry, General Shalikashvili, General Sullivan, Admiral Kelso, General Colin Powell, Senator Thurmond, distinguished Members of the House of Representatives, Mayor Kelly, distinguished guests, members and friends of the United States Army, ladies and gentlemen all, I am pleased to join you on this day and at this time. A number of people have had a hand in making this day possible and I owe thanks to them all. First, of course, I deeply appreciate the President's nomination and, upon confirmation, appointment of me to lead our Army. I am gratified by the recommendation in my behalf by the Secretary of Defense and his Deputy, Bill Perry, to the President and by their continued support and encouragement of me during the period of nomination, confirmation and transition. I appreciate as well the support and advice of the Members of the Senate and of the House of Reprsentatives during this period. I especially appreciate the time and thoughtfulness of the Members of the Senate Armed Services Committee and their staffs as they went about their constitutional duties, and the wisdom imparted to me by other Members of the Senate as well. I am indebted to those Members of the House of Representatives, including the Delegate from the District of Columbia, the Honorable Eleanor Holmes Norton, for their counsel and support. We in the Army and in the Department of Defense understand the constitutional role of the United States Congress in raising and equipping the nation's Army, and we value the cooperative relationship that exists between the Department of Defense and the legislative branch of government. I am grateful to the members of my family who, for a family as small as ours, are here in unusual number--my law school classmate, life's partner, severest critic, most dependable friend, my wife Gail; our daughters Tiffany and Hilary, who continue to grow in grace and beauty and wisdom, and who are a constant source of joy and pride to their parents; their uncle, Theodore Newton Berry, whom I have known since he was eleven, then a fine boy, later a fine young man and, now, somewhat older, but still a fine person; and his parents, my mother-in-law, Johnnie Mae Berry, a warm and wonderful human being, and my father-in-law, Theodore Moody Berry, a true American hero who rose from selling newspapers on the street corners of Cincinnati as a child to become the Mayor of that city. My mother and father are here today; she, in person, he, now dead some twenty years, in spirit. It is their discipline--the discipline of two dedicated teachers in the Winston-Salem public school system--and their high expectations that have shaped me and that influence me still to this day. They and their entire generation represent the people on whose shoulders I and my generation have stood to reach this point. You can see that this is, in many ways, for me, a family day. And members of other families of which I am or have felt a part, my church, my community, the National Cathedral, and the Kennedy Center are also here. Those families, too, have made this occasion possible. They include former teachers, fellow students and friends from my hometown of Winston- Salem, North Carolina; colleagues and professors from our days at Howard University; fellow lawyers and workers from the Army Judge Advocate General's Corps, my former law firms, the Navy General Counsel's Office, the Department of Defense General Counsel's Office; and former colleagues from other Army and Navy offices, from the Office of the Secretary of Defense, and from my former corporation--all have helped to bring me to this point. And for that, I am truly grateful. I have been called to lead the finest land force in the world. Your United States Army is a force without equal anywhere on the globe. Discharging the responsibilities of this office will require my best efforts in caring for the men and women who are America's Army. I will give that effort. And I am encouraged by the realization that I will not be required to do it alone. I could not ask for a better team than the one assembled here. General Gordon Sullivan, our Chief of Staff, from whom you have just heard, has been the key architect of the Army's response to a constantly and swiftly changing world. His service, especially over the past year, has been as an exemplar of selfless, dedicated leadership. As Chief of Staff and Acting Secretary over the past several months, he has given the best of himself, and he has done it time and time again. General Sullivan, there are not words to express nor accolades sufficient to acknowledge your contributions to this Army you so clearly love and this country you so ably serve. Joe Reeder, the newly appointed Under Secretary of the Army, brings an enthusiasm and high regard for America's soldiers formed during his own time of active service, as West Point cadet, commissioned officer, Ranger, Army lawyer and staunch supporter of Army concerns. Together, with General Sullivan, we are determined to deliver for our soldiers just as they are delivering for us. Determination and pride, however, will not do the job alone. For that reason, I have a specific message for the Army's leadership, military and civilian, assembled here today. These are my expectations, and they frame the requirements I will impose. My goal for the Army is a simple one, and I have already stated it: to make our Army better tomorrow than it was yesterday, and to transmit that Army to my successor better trained, better equipped and better supported than the already high state in which it was transmitted to me. To fulfill this goal, I will require your personal support and your enthusiasm. But there is more: I require that you adopt as a personal mandate that you will fulfill your fullest potential in every action you take, every responsibility you assume, every endeavor you attempt. I direct this challenge to you not as a means of your personal development, but rather because, as you already know, the soldiers you serve and lead deserve your best effort and, as I and this Administration know, the American people demand it. Finally, this closing thought. This is a wonderful day. It fills me with pride and joy, and I hope it is a source of some fulfillment for my family and friends as well. But this day is not about me. It is about America's Army. It is about that Army as it faces new challenges this year and enters a new chapter in its history today. It is about that Army as it faces a world grown newly--and gravely-- complex, even as some old threats die. And it is about the men and women who face the new complexity. They are the active duty members, reservists, National Guardsmen and Guardswomen, and Department of the Army civilians. And they are our family members. They are not strangers. They are the sons and daughters of our neighborhoods, from next door, or the next block, or the farm a few miles down. In the words of that traditional Christmas carol, ``They are our neighbors' children, whom we have seen before.'' They differ from us only in that they have chosen to do our nation's business, and to do it in uniform, thereby committing themselves to the timeless traditions of duty and service and sacrifice. To them, I say, we are counting on you, just as we always have. We know you will not let us down because, in the history of this nation, you never have. And, just as you--America's sons and daughters--have stood and are standing up for America; this President, this Secretary of Defense, this Deputy Secretary of Defense, this Under Secretary of the Army, this Chief of Staff, this Secretary of the Army and this Nation will continue to stand up for you. We can do no less. Bless you all; thanks for making this day possible and for sharing it with me. ____ Remarks by General Gordon R. Sullivan at the Welcome Ceremony in Honor of the Honorable Togo D. West Jr., Secretary of the Army Members of Congress, Mayor Kelly (District of Columbia), Perry (Deputy Secretary of Defense), Days (U.S. Solicitor General), former Secretaries of the Army Alexander, Ailes, and Stahr, General and Shalikashvili (Chairman of the JCS), General and Powell (former Chairman of the JCS), Admiral Kelso (Chief of Naval Operations), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is a real pleasure to see all of you here today for this important ceremony. The Army today welcomes the Honorable Togo West as the sixteenth Secretary of the Army, and I thank all of you for being here in support of the Army. Let me also take a moment to thank the soldiers here today--members of the Old Guard and the United States Army band, ``Pershing's Own.'' As usual they are delivering a superb performance--truly representing the spirit, pride, and professionalism of all the soldiers, all the fine young men and women, serving their nation today. This is a great day for the Army and a great day for the Nation. It's a real pleasure to welcome a new leader to the United States Army. But while he is new to the job of Secretary of the Army, he is by no means new to leadership, service with the military, or service to his fellow citizens. West has been associated with the Army, the armed forces and public service since his graduation from law school. A captain in the Army Judge Advocate General Corps, early in his career he came to know soldiers and to value the importance of the American soldier to a strong national defense. Both his professional ability and his dedication to public service are evident from his service across three presidential administrations. Service in the Department of Justice under President Ford; appointed General Counsel of the Navy, and then General Counsel for the Department of Defense by President Carter; and in 1982, service on a special panel for the Secretary of State. A respected and accomplished attorney, he is also a leader in the community as well. He is currently the Chairman of the Kennedy Center Friends and Community Board, has previously served as the Chairman of the Trustees Council of the YMCA, and serves on the Standing Committee of the Episcopal Diocese of Washington--to name only a few of his numerous community activities. An accomplished professional, an experienced public servant, and a selfless contributor to the community-- West is a leader. The Army could not be more fortunate than to be able to welcome West as the new Secretary at this critical juncture in our history. The Army today stands at the threshold of the 21st Century, and has in many ways already entered a new era. We are an Army that has experienced significant change in the past 4 years--we are in many ways a changed Army. But we are by no means finished. There are challenges still to be met. The future will not be placid--it never is. These are very demanding times--tough missions--missions which require strategic agility in thought and deed. We are transforming ourselves and serving our Nation. We are doing it. We are employing our forces and training our forces. West, the soldiers of America's Army--active, National Guard, and Army Reserve--are fortunate to have a leader who has a clear vision of the challenges we will face in the 21st Century. We are fortunate to have in West a leader who knows that Nation's defense depends on an Army that is trained and ready, an Army with the absolute best equipment, and an Army that is made up of top quality young men and women, the top athletes, scholars and citizens, from every one of our fifty states and territories. We are proud and honored to have Secretary West as our leader. Today America's Army--over 1 million men and women and their families; from every corner of our country; from camps, posts and stations around the globe--America's Army welcomes a new leader, our new Secretary. West, America's Army today stands trained and ready; we are meeting the challenges of today; you will lead us in to the 21st Century; we are ready. Count on us! ____________________
 
The speaker is FORD and he says  President, in accordance with section 318 of Public Law 101-520, I am submitting the summary tabulations of Senate mass mail costs for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 1993, that is the period of July 1, 1993, through September 30, 1993, to be printed in the Record, along with the quarterly statement from the U.S. Postal Service setting forth the Senate's total postage costs for the quarter. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: SENATE QUARTERLY MASS MAIL VOLUMES AND COSTS FOR THE QUARTER ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 1993 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Original Pieces total per Original Cost per pieces capita total cost capita ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Senators: Akaka................... 0 0.00000 $0.00 $0.00000 Baucus.................. 68,666 08333 12,660.57 .01536 Bennett................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Biden................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Bingaman................ 19,875 .01257 4,183.86 .00265 Bond.................... 21,850 .00421 4,562.46 .00088 Boren................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Boxer................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Bradley................. 8,850 .00114 1,344,01 .00017 Breaux.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Brown................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Bryan................... 97,920 .07379 14,900.32 .01123 Bumpers................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Burns................... 61,067 .07411 12,084.18 .01467 Byrd.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Campbell................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Chafee.................. 32,050 .03189 5,395.39 .00537 Coast................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Cochran................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Cohen................... 16,350 .01324 3,097.15 .00251 Conrad.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Coverdell............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Craig................... 9,200 .00862 1,897.29 .00178 D'Amato................. 260,300 .01437 44,905.48 .00248 Danforth................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Daschle................. 4,950 .00696 752.40 .00106 DeConcini............... 6,045 .00158 4,785,06 .00125 Dodd.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Dole.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Domenici................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Dorgan.................. 33,175 .05216 5,086.80 .00800 Durenberger............. 80,440 .01796 11,435.41 .00255 Exon.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Faircloth............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Feingold................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Feinstein............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Ford.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Glenn................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Gorton.................. 192,665 .03751 37,660.30 .00733 Graham.................. 8,165 .00061 6,530.54 .00048 Gramm................... 83,010 .00470 16,829.88 .00095 Grassley................ 403,300 .14342 61,457.39 .02186 Gregg................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Harkin.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Hatch................... 7,000 .00386 1,045.86 .00058 Hatfield................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Heflin.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Helms................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Hollings................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Hutchison............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Inouye.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Jeffords................ 13,450 .02360 3,501.04 .00614 Johnston................ 11,610 .00271 5,056.38 .00118 Kassebaum............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Kempthorne.............. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Kennedy................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 KLerrey................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Kerry................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Kohl.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Lautenbert.............. 4,387 .00056 1,714.37 .00022 Leahy................... 20,500 .03596 4,018.18 .00705 Levin................... 11,563 .00123 2,372.72 .00025 Leiberman............... 13,650 .00416 2,268.19 .00069 Lott.................... 4,000 .00153 604.07 .00023 Lugar................... 5,500 .00097 1,060.45 .00019 Mack.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Mathews................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 McCain.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 McConnell............... 318,350 .08478 56,060.17 .01493 Metzenbaum.............. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Mikulski................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Mitchell................ 55,950 .04530 8,520.32 .00690 Moseley-Braun........... 647,738 .05569 95,651.15 .00822 Moynihan................ 1,627,000 .08980 295,461.39 .01631 Murkowski............... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Murray.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Nickles................. 46,000 .01432 7,910.08 .00246 Nunn.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Packwood................ 32,275 .01084 5,826.48 .00196 Pell.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Pressler................ 149,498 .21026 24,644.70 .03466 Pryor................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Reid.................... 29,479 .02221 10,040.74 .00757 Reigle.................. 242,150 .02566 37,141.45 .00394 Robb.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Rockefeller............. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Roth.................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Sarbanes................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Sasser.................. 129,900 .02586 18,733.99 .00373 Shelby.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Simon................... 518,625 .04459 78,986.85 .00679 Simpson................. 35,900 .07704 5,166.97 .01109 Smith................... 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Specter................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Stevens................. 22,750 .03876 3,924.33 .00669 Thurmond................ 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Wallop.................. 11,625 .02495 2,520.09 .00541 Warner.................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 Wellstone............... 49,700 .01109 8,151.19 .00182 Wofford................. 0 .00000 .00 .00000 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Total Total pieces cost ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Other offices: The Vice President................................ 0 $0.00 The President Pro-Tempore......................... 0 .00 The Majority Leader............................... 0 .00 The Minority Leader............................... 0 .00 The Assistant Majority Leader..................... 0 .00 The Assistant Minority Leader..................... 0 .00 Secretary of Majority Conference.................. 0 .00 Secretary of Minority Conference.................. 0 .00 Agriculture Committee............................. 0 .00 Appropriations Committee.......................... 0 .00 Armed Services Committee.......................... 0 .00 Banking Committee................................. 0 .00 Budget Committee.................................. 0 .00 Commerce Committee................................ 0 .00 Energy Committee.................................. 0 .00 Environment Committee............................. 0 .00 Finance Committee................................. 0 .00 Foreign Relations Committee....................... 0 .00 Governmental Affairs Committee.................... 0 .00 Judiciary Committee............................... 0 .00 Labor Committee................................... 0 .00 Rules Committee................................... 0 .00 Small Business Committee.......................... 0 .00 Veterans' Affairs Committee....................... 0 .00 Ethics Committee.................................. 0 .00 Indian Affairs Committee.......................... 0 .00 Intelligence Committee............................ 0 .00 Aging Committee................................... 0 .00 Joint Economic Committee.......................... 0 .00 Joint Committee on Printing....................... 0 .00 Democratic Policy Committee....................... 0 .00 Democratic Conference............................. 0 .00 Republican Policy Committee....................... 0 .00 Republican Conference............................. 0 .00 Legislative Counsel............................... 0 .00 Legal Counsel..................................... 0 .00 Secretary of the Senate........................... 0 .00 Sergeant at Arms.................................. 0 .00 Narcotics Caucus.................................. 0 .00 SCMTE POW/MIA..................................... 0 .00 ------------------- Total......................................... 0 .00 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ United States Postal Service, Washington DC, December 9, 1993. Hon. Wendell H. Ford, Chairman, Committee on Rules and Administration, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Chairman: Detailed data on franked mail usage by the U.S. Senate for the fourth quarter, Fiscal Year 1993, is enclosed. Total postage and fees for the quarter is $3,254,024. A summary of Senate franked mail usage based upon actual data for the four quarters of Fiscal Year 1993 is as follows: Volume--41,453,448; revenue per piece--$.2553; revenue-- $10,581,895.00; provisional payments (March 1993)-- $10,000,000.00; deficiency in provisional payments-- $581,895.00. A bill is enclosed for the difference between the actual charges and the provisional payments. Also enclosed is a copy of the comparable report for the United States House of Representatives. If you or your staff have any questions, please call Tom Galgano of my staff. Sincerely, Thomas E. Dale, Jr., For Alfred Carreon, Jr., Manager, Post Office Accounting Finance, room 8831, Washington, DC. Enclosures. SENATE--FRANKED MAIL [Postal quarter IV, fiscal year 1993] ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Rate in Amount in Pieces dollars dollars ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Subcategories: 1. Letters: First class............ 2,787,354 .2900 808,333 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 2,787,354 .2900 808,333 ================================== 2. Flats: First class.............. 139,719 1.1064 154,585 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 139,719 1.1064 154,585 ================================== 3. Parcels: Priority--Up to 11 oz............ ........... ....... ........... Priority--Over 11 oz............. 27,440 4.3469 119,279 4th Class--Regular............... 40,651 3.9547 160,763 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 68,091 4.1128 280,042 ================================== 4. Orange bag pouches: First class. 4,706 .3608 1,698 Priority--Up to 11 oz............ 64 2.9063 186 Priority--Over 11 oz............. 263 5.1027 1,342 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 5,033 .6410 3,226 ================================== 5. Agriculture bulletins: First class............................. ........... ....... ........... Priority--Up to 11 oz............ ........... ....... ........... Priority--Over 11 oz............. ........... ....... ........... 3rd Class........................ ........... ....... ........... 4th Class Special (Bk)........... ........... ....... ........... 4th Class Regular................ 69 9.5217 657 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 69 9.5217 657 ================================== 6. Yearbooks: 4th Class Special (Bk).............................. 775 1.4800 1,147 ---------------------------------- Total.......................... 775 1.4800 1,147 ================================== 7. Other (odd size parcels): Priority--Up to 11 oz............ ........... ....... ........... Priority--Over 11 oz............. 598 36.2074 21,652 4th Class Special (Bk)........... ........... ....... ........... 4th Class Regular................ 2,635 11.0653 29,157 Total.......................... 3,233 15.7157 50,809 Total outside DC (See attachment).... 360,105 .4831 173,954 Permit imprint mailings: 1st class single piece rate........ 121,999 .2465 30,075 3rd class bulk rate................ 8,800,385 .1319 1,161,108 Parcel post--PI.................... 30 6.8667 206 First class single piece--PI....... ........... ....... ........... Address corrections (3547's)....... 12 .3333 4 Address corrections (3rd CL)....... 15 .2666 4 Mailing list corrections (10 names or less).......................... ........... ....... ........... Mailing list corrections (more than 10 names)......................... ........... ....... ........... Mailgrams.......................... ........... ....... ........... IPA--International priority airmail ........... ....... ........... Mailing fees (registry, certified, etc.)............................. ........... ....... ........... Postage due/short paid mail........ ........... ....... 57 Permit fees........................ ........... ....... ........... Miscellaneous charges/ADJ.......... ........... ....... ........... Express mail service............... ........... ....... 418,872 Sub-total...................... 12,286,820 .2509 3,083,079 Adjustments (PFY to GFY)....... 390,508 .4378 170,945 ---------------------------------- Grand total.................... 12,677,328 .2567 3,254,024 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ ____________________
 
The speaker is FEINSTEIN and he says  The rarest of all possible talents is the brilliance to make others radiate with joy. That is the very special quality of Charlotte Mailliard Swig of San Francisco. Charlotte has the magical gift to transform shadow into sunlight by making even the most humdrum occasion festive and lively. Today, she is being honored by Episcopal Charities in San Francisco, and I want to call attention of the U.S. Senate to her many accomplishments. Fittingly, she is being given the Hand-to-Hand Award for her leadership in helping those who are ill and suffering and would be forgotten if it were not for her caring heart. As a past recipient of the award, I know how extraordinary and special it is, and the award to Charlotte makes it all the more so. In so many ways, she walks hand in hand with those striving to build a stronger, more caring community. She presently is chair of the effort to raise private contributions to match public funds to build a modern Main Library in San Francisco that will meet the needs of our new technological and fast-moving society. It will employ the latest in computer wizardry to tap into fountains of knowledge in libraries and universities around the world. It will be the prototype for libraries of the 21st century. The library will provide special collections to satisfy the diversity of a great city, and will offer entertainment and education to young and old alike in an atmosphere that will stimulate the mind and imagination. The library will be a wonderful resource and splendid sanctuary for all those who treasure the written word, the seeds for which were planted when I was mayor of San Francisco and Charlotte walked with me hand in hand on so many worthy projects. When I was mayor, I appointed Charlotte San Francisco's chief of protocol to turn visits by presidents and heads of state and all civic occasions into events in which the whole city could participate and take pride and would be truly memorable for everyone involved. Each event was carried off with flare and imagination from fire works sparkling within the dome of city hall to red, white, and blue balloons sailing skyward to greet the men and women of our Navy as their ships steamed into San Francisco Bay for the annual Fleet Week. Always, Charlotte gave an unforgettable touch to all she planned. So many events standout--the Super Bowl-winning Forty Niners parading through downtown San Francisco aboard motorized cablecars, the tens of thousands who arrived at dawn at the Golden State Bridge to celebrate its 50th anniversary in 1987. Even when President Clinton came to San Francisco late in 1993, Charlotte added her magic by arranging for ``Hail to the Chief'' to be played not by a full orchestra or a brass band but by a single saxophonist, the great Clarence Clemmons. Even at times of great personal loss and sorrow, Charlotte's buoyancy never fades, her commitment to her community never lessens. She is truly remarkable. The Hand-to-Hand Award pays deserving tribute to Charlotte Mailliard Swig for her many civic activities, but to me she is more than a superb leader and wonderfully creative impresario, but she is a close and dear friend, and I welcome this opportunity to personally pay tribute to her. ____________________
 
The speaker is DOLE and he says  President, with the public release of the Iran-Contra final report, the Lawrence Walsh witch-hunt is officially over. But it will never be over for the innocent people whose reputations were nonetheless recklessly, and irreparably, damaged by Walsh in his final report. Apparently, Walsh spared no one, trashing Cabinet Secretaries and personal secretaries alike. As an article appearing in yesterday's Wall Street Journal explained: ``Dozens of examples from the * * * final report show Walsh stomping on his victim's rights. Publishing the report itself is profoundly unfair * * * the final report contains hundreds, perhaps thousands, of * * * unproven allegations, even including excerpts of grand jury testimony.'' And, President, that is the point: When the ``Not Guilty'' verdict is read or indictments are not brought, a prosecutor normally picks up his briefcase and moves on to the next case. Unlike Walsh, he does not spend 8 months, at taxpayer expense, memorializing his own efforts and smearing the very people he failed to convict or even indict. Last year, during the Senate debate over the Reauthorization of the Independent Counsel Act, I offered an amendment restricting the scope of final reports issued by future independent counsels. This amendment, which was designed to ensure that future independent counsels will not resort to Walsh-style smear tactics in their final reports, was adopted by the Senate on a bipartisan basis. It is my hope that the House of Representatives will adopt a similar amendment when it considers the reauthorization measure, perhaps as early as next month. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Wall Street Journal article be inserted in the Record immediately after my remarks. There being no objection, the article was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: [From the Wall Street Journal, Jan. 24, 1994] Damning News in Walsh Report (By Michael Ledeen) Most of the working press, hoping as they had for seven years that Iran-Contra special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh would somehow pull a fluffy crime out of his empty hat, treated Walsh's final report as old news, and in one sense they were right. After Walsh's election-eve indictment of Caspar Weinberger (the statute of limitations having quite clearly expired), after his tendentious ``interim reports'' that slandered his targets without enabling them to reply, after his utterly unethical public statements about the ``guilt'' of one or another target, the special prosecutor expired with a long sigh. There was no evidence to justify any further prosecutions. He even had some kind words for Ronald Reagan: He meant well; he thought he was advancing the national interest. Yet there is news in the final report. For starters, there is a drastically revised portrait of Secretary of State George Shultz, previously enthroned as the lone teller of truth of the Reagan cabinet. A Hero Dethroned It appears that Shultz systematically misled Walsh and Congress about the extent of his knowledge throughout Iran-Contra. The final report contains dozens of excerpts from notes and memorandums prepared by Shultz's two top assistants that show that many State Department officials were very well informed, indeed, about matters that Shultz had sworn the department in general and he in particular had been kept in the dark about. ``Shultz . . . ultimately acknowledged that his testimony had been incorrect,'' the report says, but Walsh decided not to prosecute the former secretary of state because he couldn't prove ``beyond a reasonable doubt that his testimony was willfully false.'' Yet he did prosecute Weinberger for allegedly doing precisely what Shultz had done, and the evidence presented against Shultz is, if anything, more copious than that against Weinberger. The choice was probably dictated by personal rapport and political calculation: Shultz was the darling of Capitol Hill, while Weinberger was a pricklier personality; Shultz was cooperative with Walsh and admitted false testimony, while Weinberger defiantly held his ground. A second bit of news is a return to one of Walsh's original theories about Iran-Contra: that among Shultz, Weinberger, Donald Regan, John Poindexter, William Casey, Ed Meese and Robert McFarlane there was a great conspiracy to prevent the special prosecutor and the American people from learning what had really happened. It is a hilarious notion, evidently written by Walsh's left hand, for the right hand has given us copious evidence that the would-be conspirators--at the very moment Walsh says they were plotting--were actually making feverish efforts to get each other fired. It requires a hyperactive imagination to believe that such antagonisms could be sublimated in the creation of an Iran-Contra coverup, and then sustained for seven years. The third headline concerns George Bush, or rather Walsh's newfound obsession with him. After years of shadowing Reagan, and hinting darkly that he'd eventually be harpooned, Walsh suddenly gave up the chase and shifted targets. Whatever the explanation, the shift bespeaks a certain capriciousness in Walsh's decision-making process, rather than the relentless investigatory rigor he would have us believe he employed. But most of the news is about Walsh and his team. Appended to Walsh's account are more than 1,000 pages of responses from persons named in the report (or, given the nature of Washington, from their lawyers)--a victim's guide to how we subverted our own legal system. Much of this is brand-new, for it comes from the Indians, not from the chiefs: from secretaries and assistants and other midlevel civil servants. No one is too small to become a target of Walsh's cruelty; he accuses them all of crime or sin. While stressing he does not have enough to warrant indictment or ensure conviction, he puts his black spot on them. Their responses constitute a bloodcurdling catalog of Walsh's viciousness, unethical behavior and astounding incompetence. For example, both of Weinberger's secretaries, Pentagon professionals for more than 20 years, were accused of lying. Both denied it. One of them, Thelma Stubbs Smith, was hauled in front of a grand jury, where one of Walsh's men accused her of lying. Shocked, she denied it, and her lawyer demanded a correction. None was made. Later, Walsh's lawyer asked to interview her without her lawyer being present; the request was categorically denied. Three days later, Walsh's lawyer showed up at her door at 8 asking to talk to her. Her husband sent the rogue away. Meanwhile, the other secretary, Kay Leisz, was informed that she was now a ``subject'' of Walsh's investigation. The report accuses her of false testimony; her lawyer's response shows the opposite an says: ``It appears that the only rationale that [Walsh's office] might have . . . is that she may not have said what they wanted to hear.'' The same kinds of vengeful actions were taken against Samuel Watson, one of Bush's assistants. Watson was accused of pronouncing the magic words ``Contra resupply'' as a possible subject for discussion at a meeting in the vice president's office. He didn't remember it, and denied any knowledge of the supply of military equipment to the Contras. Walsh, somehow convinced that Watson was covering up for Bush, proclaims him a liar. Watson's lawyer, former special prosecutor Jacob Stein, observed that ``it was not for illegal acts themselves that the [special prosecutor] sought Watson but rather . . . [for] his inability years later to remember events as the [special prosecutor] wished him to,'' Stein delicately observes that such behavior ``violates the fairness of our American sense of right and wrong.'' The entire case against CIA station chief Joe Fernandez was a joke. Walsh bungled the handling of classified information so badly that not even an appeal from the Justice Department to the court could save him. Typically, Walsh thanked Justice by blaming them for the screwup. His key witness to the charge of false testimony against Fernandez had already told the Office of the Independent Counsel that his own memory was ``tainted'' by the public testimony of others, thereby making him a useless source. Walsh's lawyers attempted to browbeat him into testifying that there was no ``taint.'' And lawyers' replies show that several of the statements Walsh characterized as false were in fact true. Strikingly, given Walsh's propensity for accusing folks of withholding information from him, there are several cases where Walsh was chastised by federal judges for failing to provide the defense with exculpatory material. In the Weinberger and Fernandez cases, defense attorneys had to use pretty rough language to get Walsh's team to comply, and--in one of those odd moments that make Iran-Contra such an unlikely tale--it was only when Oliver North's lawyers insisted on it that Walsh realized he had dozens of cartons of North's files in his possession. Such testimony--and there are dozens of examples--shows Walsh stomping on his victims' basic rights. Indeed, publishing the report is itself profoundly unfair if not illegal. From time immemorial it has been considered unethical for prosecutors to make allegations against persons they do not indict, yet the final report contains hundreds, perhaps thousands, of such unproven allegations, even including excerpts of grand-jury testimony. Grand-jury proceedings have always been secret, in part to protect people the grand jury decides not to indict. Walsh bizarrely proclaimed that such requirements do not apply to special prosecutors and stuck the testimony in his report. The special court that theoretically oversees the work of special prosecutors rejected his theory but permitted the report to appear anyway, on the feeble grounds that very little of the material was really secret anyway and a lot of people--especially journalists--would be angry if the court didn't publish it. Cowardly Court It was a cowardly thing for the court to do, and the three judges obviously knew it, for they took pains to indicate their sympathy for those unindicted people besmirched by the report. Had they been made of sterner stuff, the judges would have instructed Walsh to delete all accusations against unindicted people, and to remove all references to grand-jury testimony. Such a document would have fulfilled Walsh's obligation to submit a final report and also maintained the quaint notion that Americans are held innocent unless proved guilty. We learned some years ago that Walsh was contemptuous of such archaic legal notions; it was bad news that the special court wouldn't defend them either. ____________________
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  laid before the Senate the following message from the President of the United States; which was ordered to lie on the table. To the Congress of the United States: As we gather to review the State of the Union, I recall the memory of the giant who presided in this Chamber with such force and grace. Tip O'Neill liked to call himself ``a man of the House.'' And he surely was that. But--even more--he was a man of the people, a bricklayer's son who helped build the American middle class. Tip O'Neill never forgot who he was, where he came from, or who sent him here. We too must remember who we are, where we come from, and who sent us here. We must return to the principle that if we give ordinary people equal opportunity, quality education, and a fair shot at the American dream, they will do extraordinary things. We gather tonight in a world of changes so profound and rapid that all nations are tested. Our American heritage has always been to master change, to expand opportunity at home, and provide leadership abroad. But for too long, and in too many ways, that heritage was abandoned, and our country drifted. For thirty years, family life in America has been breaking down. For twenty years, the wages of working families have been stagnant, or declining. For twelve years of trickle-down economics, we tried to build a false prosperity on a hollow base. Our national debt quadrupled. From 1989 to 1992, we experienced the slowest growth in a half century. For too many families, even when both parents are working, the American dream has been slipping away. In 1992, the American people demanded change. One year ago I asked you to join me and accept responsibility for the future of our country. Well, we did. We replaced drift and deadlock with renewal and reform. I want to thank all of you who heard the American people, broke gridlock, and gave them the most successful teamwork between a President and a Congress for thirty years. This Congress produced: A budget that cut the deficit by half a trillion dollars, cut spending and raised income taxes only on the very wealthiest Americans. Tax relief for millions of low income workers to reward work over welfare. NAFTA. The Brady bill--which is now the Brady law. Tax cuts to help nine out of ten small businesses invest more and create jobs. More research and treatment for AIDS. More childhood immunizations. More support for women's health research. More affordable college loans for the middle class. A new national service program for those who want to give something back to their community and earn money for higher education. A dramatic increase in high tech investments to move us from a defense to a domestic economy. A new law, the Motor Voter bill, to help millions of people register to vote. Family and Medical Leave. All passed. All signed into law with no vetoes. These accomplishments were all commitments I made when I sought this office, and they were all passed by this Congress. But the real credit belongs to the people who sent us here, pay our salaries, and hold our feet to the fire. What we do here is really beginning to change lives. I will never forget what Family and Medical Leave meant to one father who brought his little girl to visit the White House last year. After we talked and took a picture, he held on to my arm and said,``my little girl is really sick, and she's probably not going to make it. But because of the Family and Medical Leave law I can take time off without losing my job. I have had some precious time with my child, the most important time I have ever had, without hurting the rest of my family. Don't you ever think that what you do up here doesn't make a difference.'' Though we are making a difference, our work has just begun. Many Americans still haven't felt the impact of what we have done. The recovery has still not touched every community or created enough jobs. Incomes are still stagnant. There is still too much violence and not enough hope. And abroad, the young democracies we support still face difficult times and look to us for leadership. And so tonight, let us continue our journey of renewal: to create more and better jobs, guarantee health security for all, reward work over welfare, promote democracy abroad, and begin to reclaim our streets from violent crime and drugs, and renew our own American community. Last year, we began to put our house in order by tackling the budget deficit that was driving us toward bankruptcy. We cut $255 billion dollars in spending, including entitlements, and over 340 budget items. We froze domestic spending, and used honest numbers. Led by the Vice President, we launched a campaign to reinvent government. We cut staff, cut perks, and trimmed the fleet of federal limousines. After years of leaders whose rhetoric attacked bureaucracy, but whose actions expanded it, we will actually reduce it, by 252,000 over five years. By the time we have finished, the federal bureaucracy will be at its lowest level in thirty years. Because the deficit was so large and because they had benefitted from tax cuts in the 1980s, we asked the wealthy to pay more to reduce the deficit. So April 15th, the American people will discover the truth about what we did last year on taxes. Only the top 1.2% of Americans will face higher income tax rates. Let me repeat: Only the wealthiest 1.2% of Americans will face higher income tax rates, and no one else will. The naysayers said our plan wouldn't work. Well, they were wrong. When I became President, the experts predicted next year's deficit would be $300 billion. But because we acted, the deficit is now going to be less than $180 billion--forty percent lower than predicted. Our economic program has helped to produce the lowest core inflation rate and the lowest interest rates in twenty years. And because those interest rates are down, business investment in equipment is growing at seven times the pace of the previous four years. Auto sales are way up. Home sales are at a record high. Millions have refinanced their homes. And our economy has produced 1.6 million private sector jobs in 1993-- more than were created in the previous four years combined. The people who supported this economic plan should be proud of its first results. But there's much more to do. Next month, I will send you one of the toughest budgets ever presented to Congress. It will cut spending in more than 300 programs, eliminate 100 domestic programs, and reform the way government buys its goods and services. This year, we must make the hard choices again to live within the hard spending ceilings we have set. We have proved we can bring down the deficit without choking off the recovery, without punishing seniors or the middle class, and without putting our national security at risk. If you will stick with our plan, we will post three consecutive years of declining deficits for the first time since Harry Truman lived in the White House. Once again, the buck stops here. Our economic plan also bolsters America's strength and credibility around the world. Once we reduced the deficit, and put the steel back in our competitive edge, the world echoed with the sound of falling trade barriers. In one year, with NAFTA, GATT, our efforts in Asia, and the National Export strategy, we did more to open world markets to American products than at any time over the last two generations. That will mean more jobs and rising living standards for the American people. Low deficits, low inflation, low interest rates, low trade barriers and high investment--these are the building blocks of our recovery. But if we want to take full advantage of the opportunities before us in the global economy, we must do more. As we reduce defense spending, I ask Congress to invest more in the technologies of tomorrow. Defense conversion will keep us strong militarily and create jobs. As we protect our environment, we must invest in the environmental technologies of the future which will create jobs. And this year we will fight for a revitalized Clean Water Act and Safe Drinking Water Act, and a reformed Superfund program. And the Vice President is right: We must work with the private sector to connect every classroom, every clinic, every library, and every hospital in America to a national information superhighway by the year 2000. Instant access to information will increase productivity, help educate our children, and provide better medical care and create jobs, I call on Congress this year to pass legislation to establish the information superhighway. As we expand opportunity and create jobs, no one can be left out. We will continue to enforce fair lending and fair housing and all civil rights laws, because America will never complete its renewal unless everyone shares in its bounty. We can do all these things, put our economic house in order, expand world trade, and target the jobs of the future. And we will. But let's be honest: this strategy cannot work unless we also give our people the education, training and skills they need to seize the opportunities of tomorrow. We must set tough, world-class academic and occupational standards for all of our children--and give our teachers and students the tools to meet them. Our Goals 2000 proposal will empower individual school districts to experiment with ideas like chartering their schools to be run by private corporations, public school choice--so long as we measure every school by one high standard: Are our children learning what they need to know to complete and win in this new economy. Goals 2000 links world class standards to grass roots reforms. Congress should pass it without delay. Our school-to-work initiative will for the first time link schools to the world of work, and will provide at least one year of apprenticeship beyond high school. After all, most of the people we're counting on to build our economic future do not graduate from college. It's time to stop ignoring them and start empowering them. We must transform America's outdated unemployment system into a reemployment system. The old system just kept you going while you waited for your old job to come back; but we have to have a new system to move people into new and better jobs, because most people don't get their old jobs back. The only way to get a real job with a growing income is to have real skills and the ability to learn new ones. We simply must streamline today's patchwork of training programs and make them a source of new skills for people who lose their jobs. Reemployment, not unemployment, will be the centerpiece of our program for economic renewal, and I urge you to pass it this year. Just as we must transform our unemployment system, we must also revolutionize our welfare system. It doesn't work. It defies our values as a nation. If we value work, we cannot justify a system that makes welfare more attractive than work. If we value personal responsibility, we cannot ignore the $34 billion in child support that absent parents ought to be paying to millions of mothers and children. If we value strong families, we cannot perpetuate a system that penalizes those who stay together. Can you believe that a child who has a child gets more money from the government for leaving home than for staying with a parent or a grandparent? That's not just bad policy; it is wrong. And we must change it. I worked for years on this welfare problem, and I can tell you: the people who most want to change welfare are the very people on it. They want to get off welfare, and get back to work, and support their children. Last year, we began. We gave the states more power to innovate-- because we know that great ideas can come from outside Washington--and many states are using it. Then, we took a dramatic step. Instead of taxing people with modest incomes who are working their way out of poverty, we dramatically increased the Earned Income Tax Credit to lift them out of poverty, to reward work over welfare, to make it possible for people to be successful workers and successful parents. But there is much more to be done. This spring, I will send you comprehensive welfare reform legislation that builds on the Family Support Act and restores the basic values of work and responsibility. We will say to teenagers, ``If you have a child out of wedlock, we will no longer give you a check to set up a separate household. We want families to stay together.'' To absent parents who aren't paying child support, we'll say: ``If you're not providing for your children, we'll garnish your wages, we'll suspend your license, we'll track you across state lines, and if necessary, we'll make some of you work off what you owe. People who bring children into this world can't just walk away.'' And to all those who depend on welfare, we offer this simple compact: We will provide the support, the job training, the child care you need for up to two years. But after that, anyone who can work must work--in the private sector if possible, in community service if necessary. We will make welfare what it ought to be: A second chance, not a way of life. We must tackle welfare reform in 1994, yes, as we tackle health care. A million people are on welfare today are there because it's the only way they can get health care coverage. Those who choose leave welfare for jobs without health benefits find themselves in the incredible position of paying taxes that help pay for health coverage for those who choose to stay on welfare. No wonder many people leave work and go back on welfare to get health care coverage. We must solve the health care problem to solve the welfare problem. This year, we will make history by reforming our health care system. This is another issue where the people are way ahead of the politicians. The First Lady has received almost a million letters from people all across America and all walks of life. Let me share one of them with you. Richard Anderson of Reno, Nevada lost his job and, with it, his health insurance. Two weeks later, his wife Judy suffered a cerebral aneurysm. He rushed her to the hospital, where she stayed in intensive care for twenty-one days. The Anderson's bills exceeded $120,000. Although Judy recovered and Richard went back to work, at eight dollars an hour, the bills were too much for them. They were forced into bankruptcy by high medical costs. ``Clinton,'' he wrote to Hillary, ``no one in the United States of America should have to lose everything they have worked for all their lives because they were unfortunate enough to become ill.'' It was to help the Richard and Judy Andersons of America that the First Lady and so many others have worked so hard on the health care issue, and we owe them our thanks. There are others in Washington who say there is no health care crisis. Tell that to Richard and Judy Anderson. Tell it to the 58 million Americans who have no coverage at all for some time each year that there is no health care crisis. Tell it to the 81 million Americans with ``pre-existing'' conditions who are paying more, can't get insurance, or can't change jobs. Tell it to the small businesses burdened by the skyrocketing cost of insurance. Tell it to the 76 percent of insured Americans whose policies have lifetime limits--and who can find themselves without any coverage just when they need it most--tell them there is no health care crisis. You tell them--because I can't. The naysayers don't understand the impact of this problem on people's lives. They just don't get it. We must act now to show that we do. From the day we began, our health care initiative has been designed to strengthen all that is good about our health care system. The world's best health professionals. Cutting-edge research and research institutions. Medicare for older Americans. None of this should be put at risk. We're paying more and more money for less and less care. Every year fewer and fewer Americans even get to choose their doctors. Every year doctors and nurses spend more time on paperwork and less on patients because of the bureaucratic nightmare the present system has become. The system is riddled with inefficiency, abuse and fraud. In today's health care system, insurance companies call all the shots. They pick and choose whom they cover. They can cut off your benefits when you need your coverage most. They are in charge. And so every night, millions of well-insured Americans go to bed just an illness, an accident, or a pink slip away from financial ruin. Every morning millions more go to work without health insurance for their families. And every year, hard-working people are told to pick a new doctor because their boss picked a new plan, and countless others turn down better jobs because they fear losing their insurance. If we let the health care system continue to drift, Americans will have less care, fewer choices, and higher bills. Our approach protects the quality of care and people's choices. It builds on what works today in the private sector. To expand the employer-based system and guarantee private insurance for every American--something proposed by President Richard Nixon more than twenty years ago. That's what we want: guaranteed private insurance. Right now, nine out of ten people who have private insurance get it through employers--and that must continue. And if your employer is providing good benefits at reasonable prices--that must continue, too. Our goal is health insurance you can depend on: comprehensive benefits that cover preventive care and prescription drugs; health premiums that don't jump when you get sick or get older; the power, no matter how small your business is, to choose dependable insurance at the same rates government and big companies get; one simple form for people who are sick; and, most of all, the freedom to choose a health plan and the right to choose your own doctor. Our approach protects older Americans. Every plan before Congress proposes to slow the growth of Medicare. The difference is this: We believe those savings should be used to improve health care for senior citizens. Medicare must be protected, and it should cover prescription drugs. And we should take the first steps toward covering long-term care. To those who would cut Medicare without protecting seniors, I say: the solution to today's squeeze on middle-class working people is not to put the squeeze on middle class retired people. When it's all said and done, insurance must mean what it used to mean. You pay a fair price for security and, when you get sick, health care is always there. No matter what. Along with the guarantee of health security, there must be more responsibility: parents must take their kids to be immunized; we all should take advantage of preventive care; and we all must work together to stop the violence that crowds its victims into our emergency rooms. People who don't have insurance will get coverage--but they'll have to pay something. The minority of business that provide no insurance and shift the costs to others, will have to contribute something. People who smoke will pay more for a pack of cigarettes. If we want to solve the health care crisis in this country, there can be no more something for nothing. In the coming months, I want to work with Democrats and Republicans to reform our health care system by using the market to bring down costs and to achieve lasting health security. For sixty years, this country has tried to reform health care. President Roosevelt tried. President Truman tried. President Nixon tried. President Carter tried. Every time, the powerful special interests defeated them. But not this time. Facing up to special interests will require courage. It will raise critical questions about the way we finance our campaigns and how lobbyists peddle their influence. The work of change will never get easier until we limit the influence of well financed interests who profit from the current system. So I call on you now to finish the job you began last year by passing tough, meaningful campaign finance reform and lobbying reform this year. This is a test for all of us. The American people provide those of us in government service with great benefits--health care that's always there. We need to give every hard-working, tax-paying American the same health care security they give us. Hear me clearly. If the legislation you send me does not guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away, I will take this pen, veto that legislation, and we'll come right back here and start over again. But I believe we're ready to do it right now. If you're ready to guarantee to every American health care that can never be taken away, now is the time to stand with the people who sent you here. As we take these steps together to renew America's strength at home, we must also continue our work to renew America's leadership abroad. This is a promising moment. Because of the agreements we have reached, Russia's strategic nuclear missiles soon will no longer be pointed at the United States, nor will we point ours at them. Instead of building weapons in space, Russian scientists will help us build the international space station. There are still dangers in the world: Arms proliferation; bitter regional conflicts; ethnic and nationalist tensions in many new democracies; severe environmental degradation; and fanatics who seek to cripple the world's cities with terror. As the world's greatest power, we must maintain our defenses and our responsibilities. This year we secured indictments against terrorists and sanctions against those who harbor them. We worked to promote environmentally sustainable economic growth. We achieved agreements with Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan to eliminate their nuclear arsenals. We are working to achieve a Korean peninsula free of nuclear weapons. We will seek early ratification of a treaty to ban chemical weapons world-wide. And earlier today we joined with over 30 nations to begin negotiations on a comprehensive ban to stop all nuclear testing. But nothing is more important to our security than our nation's armed forces. We honor their contributions, including those who are carrying out the longest humanitarian airlift in history in Bosnia, those who will complete their mission in Somalia this year, and their brave comrades who gave their lives there. Our forces are the finest military our nation has ever had, and I have pledged that as long as I am President, they will remain the best trained, the best equipped and the best prepared fighting force on the face of this earth. Last year I proposed a defense plan that maintains our post Cold War security at lower cost. This year, many people urged me to cut our defense spending again to pay for other government programs. I said no. The budget I send to this Congress draws the line against further defense cuts and fully protects the readiness and quality of our forces. Ultimately, the best strategy to ensure our security and build a durable peace is to support the advance of democracy. Democracies do not attack each other; they make better partners in trade and diplomacy. That is why we have supported the democratic reformers in Russia and in the other states of the former Soviet bloc. I applaud the bi- partisan support this Congress provided last year for our initiatives to help Russia, Ukraine, and other states through the epic transformations. Our support of reform must combine patience and vigilance. We will urge Russia and the other states to continue with their economic reforms. And we will seek to cooperate with Russia to solve regional problems, while insisting that if Russian troops operate in neighboring states, they do so only when those states agree to their presence, and in strict accord with international standards. But, as these new nations chart their own futures, we must not forget how much more secure and more prosperous our nation will be if democratic and market reforms succeed across the former communist bloc. That is why I went to Europe earlier this month: to work with our European partners to help integrate the former communist countries into a Europe unified for the first time in history, based on shared commitments to democracy, free market economies and respect for existing borders. With our allies, we created a Partnership for Peace that invites states from the former Soviet bloc and other non-NATO members to work with NATO in military cooperation. When I met with Central Europe's leaders--including Lech Walesa and Vaclav Havel, who put their lives on the line for freedom--I told them that the security of their region is important to America's security. This year we will provide support for democratic renewal, human rights and sustainable development around the world. We will ask Congress to ratify the new GATT accord. We will continue standing by South Africa as it makes its bold and hopeful transition. We will convene a summit of the western hemisphere's democratic leaders--from Canada to the tip of South America--and we will continue to press for the restoration of democracy in Haiti. And as we build a more constructive relationship with China, we will insist on clear signs of improvement in that nation's human rights record. We will also work for new progress toward peace in the Middle East. Last year, the world watched Yitzakh Rabin and Yassir Arafat at the White House in their historic handshake of reconciliation. On the long, hard road ahead, I am determined to do all I can to help achieve a comprehensive and lasting peace for all the peoples of the region. There are some in our country who argue that with the Cold War over, America should turn its back on the rest of the world. Many around the world were afraid we would do just that. But I took this office on a pledge to keep our nation secure by remaining engaged in the world. And this year, because of our work together--enacting NAFTA; keeping our military strong and prepared; supporting democracy abroad--we reaffirmed America's leadership and increased the security of the American people. While Americans are more secure from threats abroad, we are less secure from threats here at home.5 Every day, the national peace is shattered by crime. In Petaluma, California, an innocent slumber party gives way to agonizing tragedy for the family of Polly Klass. An ordinary train ride on Long Island ends in a hail of 9-millimeter rounds. A tourist in Florida is nearly burned alive by bigots simply because he is black. Right here in our nation's capital, a brave young man named Jason White--a policeman, the son and grandson of policemen--is ruthlessly gunned down. Violent crime and the fear it provokes are crippling our society, limiting personal freedom, and fraying the ties that bind us. The crime bill before Congress gives you a chance to do something about it--to be tough and smart. First, we must recognize that most violent crimes are committed by a small percentage of criminals, who too often break the laws even on parole. Those who commit crimes must be punished, and those who commit repeated violent crimes must be told: Commit a third violent crime and you'll be put away, and put away for good. Three strikes and you're out. Second, we must take steps to reduce violence and prevent crimes, beginning with more police officers and more community policing. We know that police who work the streets, know the folks, have the respect of the kids, and focus on high crime areas, are more likely to prevent crime as well as catch criminals. Here tonight is one of those policemen: a brave, young detective, Kevin Jett, whose beat is eight square blocks in one of the toughest blocks in New York City. Every day he restores some sanity and safety and a sense of values to the people whose lives he protects. That's why we must hire 100,000 new community police officers, well trained and patrolling beats all over America; a police corps; and move retiring military personnel into police forces across America. We must also invest in safe schools, so that our children can learn to count and read and write without also learning how to duck bullets. Third, we must build on the Brady bill, and take further steps to keep guns out of the hands of criminals. When it comes to guns, let me be clear: Hunters must always be free to hunt, and law abiding adults should be free to own guns and protect their homes. I respect that part of American culture. I grew up in it. But I want to ask sportsmen and others who lawfully own guns to join us in a common campaign to reduce gun violence. You didn't create this problem, but we need your help to solve it. There is no sporting purpose on earth that should stop us from banishing the assault weapons that outgun our police and cut down our children. So, I urge you to pass an assault weapons ban. Fourth, we must remember that drugs are a factor in an enormous percentage of crimes. Recent studies indicate that drug use is on the rise again among young people. The crime bill contains more money for drug treatment for criminal addicts and boot camps for youthful offenders. The Administration budget contains a large increase in funding for drug treatment and drug education. I hope you will pass them both. The problem of violence is an American problem. It has no partisan or philosophical element. Therefore, I urge you to set aside your partisan differences and pass a strong, smart, tough crime bill now. But, further, I urge you: As we demand tougher penalties for those who choose violence, let us also remember how we came to this sad point. In America's toughest neighborhoods, meanest streets, and poorest rural areas, we have seen a stunning breakdown of community, family and work--the heart and soul of civilized society. This has created a vast vacuum into which violence, drugs and gangs have moved. So, even as we say no to crime, we must give people--especially our young people--something to say yes to. Many of our initiatives--from job training to welfare reform to health care to national service--will help rebuild distressed communities, strengthen families, and provide work. But more needs to be done. That is what our community empowerment agenda is all about: Challenging businesses to provide more investment through Empowerment Zones; insuring that banks make loans in the same communities their deposits come from; and passing legislation to unleash the power of capital through Community Development Banks to create jobs, opportunity and hope where they are needed most. Let's be honest. Our problems go way beyond the reach of any government program. They are rooted in the loss of values, the disappearance of work, and the breakdown of our families and our communities. My fellow Americans, we can cut the deficit, create jobs, promote democracy around the globe, pass welfare reform, and health care reform, and the toughest crime bill in history, and still leave too many of our people behind. The American people must want to change within, if we are to bring back work, family and community. We cannot renew our country when within a decade more than half of our children will be born into families where there is no marriage. We cannot renew our country when thirteen year old boys get semi- automatic weapons and gun down nine year old boys--just for the kick of it. We cannot renew our country when children are having children and the fathers of those children are walking away from them as if they don't amount to anything. We cannot renew our country when our businesses eagerly look for new investments and new customers abroad, but ignore those who would give anything to have their jobs and would gladly buy their products if they had the money to do it right here at home. We cannot renew our country unless more of us are willing to join the churches and other good citizens who are saving kids, adopting schools, making streets safer. We cannot renew our country until we all realize that governments don't raise children, parents do--parents who know their children's teachers, turn off the TV, help with the homework, and teach right from wrong--can make all the difference. Let us give our children a future. Let us take away their guns and give them books. Let us overcome their despair and replace it with hope. Let us, by our example, teach them to obey the law, respect our neighbors, and cherish our values. Let us weave these sturdy threads into a new American community that can once more stand strong against the forces of despair and evil, and lead us to a better tomorrow. The naysayers fear we will not be equal to the challenges of our time, but they misread our history, our heritage, and even today's headlines. They all tell us we can and we will overcome any challenge. When the earth shook and fires raged in California, when the Mississippi deluged the farmlands of the Midwest, when a century's bitterest cold swept from North Dakota to Newport News, it seemed as though the world itself was coming apart at the seams. But the American people came together--they rose to the occasion, neighbor helping neighbor, strangers risking life and limb to save strangers, showing the better angels of our nature. Let us not reserve those better angels only for natural disasters, leaving our deepest problems to petty political fights. Let us instead be true to our spirit--facing facts, coming together, bringing hope, moving forward. Tonight, we are summoned to answer a question as old as the Republic itself. My fellow Americans, what is the State of the Union? It is growing stronger. But it must be stronger still. With your help and with God's, it will be. Thank you. And may God bless America. William J. Clinton. The White House, January 25, 1994. ____________________
 
The speaker is JOHNSTON and he says  from the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources: Report to accompany the bill (S. 297) to authorize the Air Force Memorial Foundation to establish a memorial in the District of Columbia or its environs (Rept. No. 103-210). Report to accompany the bill (S. 986) to provide for an interpretive center at the Civil War Battlefield of Corinth, Mississippi, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-211). Report to accompany the bill (S. 1574) to authorize appropriations for the Coastal Heritage Trail Route in the State of New Jersey, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103- 212). Report to accompany the bill (H.R. 698) to protect Lechuguilla Cave and other resources and values in and adjacent to Carlsbad Caverns National Park (Rept. No. 103- 213). Report to accompany the bill (H.R. 2650) to designate portions of the Maurice River and its tributaries in the State of New Jersey as components of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers Systems (Rept. No. 103-214). By
 
The speaker is BOREN, and he says  from the Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress: Special Report pursuant to H. Con. Res. 192 (102d Congress) concurrent resolution to establish a Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress. ____________________
 
The speaker is RIEGLE, and he says  from the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute: S. 783: A bill to amend the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-209). By
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, with an amendment: S. 329: A bill to amend section 315 of the Communications Act of 1934 with respect to the purchase and use of broadcasting time by candidates for public office, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-216). By
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, with amendments: S. 1640: A bill to amend the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act to authorize appropriations to carry out that Act, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-217). By
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, without amendment: S. 1515: A bill to amend the Central Bering Sea Fisheries Enforcement Act of 1992 (Rept. No. 103-218). By
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute: S. 1517: A bill to establish a marine biotechnology program within the National Sea Grant College Program, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-219). S. 335: A bill to require the Secretary of Commerce to make additional frequencies available for commercial assignment in order to promote the development and use of new telecommunications technologies, and for other purposes. ____________________
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, with amendments: S. 1636: A bill to authorize appropriations for the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 and to improve the program to reduce the incidental taking of marine mammals during the course of commercial fishing operations, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-220). Report to accompany the bill (S. 1560) to establish the Social Security Administration as an independent agency, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-221). By
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS, and he says  from the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, with an amendment in the nature of a substitute: S. 1427: A bill to provide the necessary authority to manage the activities in Antarctica of United States scientific research expeditions and United States tourists, and to regulate the taking of Antarctic marine living resources, and for other purposes (Rept. No. 103-222). ____________________
 
The speaker is DASCHLE and he says  (for himself and Pressler): S. 1786. A bill to increase the authorization of appropriations for the Belle Fourche Irrigation Project, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. By
 
The speaker is McCONNELL: and he says  S. 1787. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for the tax-free treatment of education savings accounts established through certain State programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. By
 
The speaker is GRAMM: and he says  S. 1788. A bill to authorize negotiation of free trade agreements with the countries of the Americas, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. By
 
The speaker is BOXER and he says  (for herself, Feinstein, and Hatfield): S. 1789. A bill to amend title 23, United States Code, to permit the use of funds under the highway bridge replacement and rehabilitation program for seismic retrofit of bridges, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. By
 
The speaker is BUMPERS: and he says  S. 1790. A bill entitled ``the National Peace Garden Reauthorization Act''; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. By
 
The speaker is KEMPTHORNE: and he says  S. 1791. A bill to provide for mandatory life imprisonment of a person convicted of a second offense of kidnapping a minor; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By
 
The speaker is KEMPTHORNE: and he says  S. 1792. A bill to amend the Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1973, to permit a Senator to direct that excess funds allocated to the Senator's personal office for a fiscal year be returned to the U.S. Treasury to reduce the public debt; to the Committee on Rules and Administration. By
 
The speaker is KEMPTHORNE: and he says  S. 1793. A bill to provide an exemption from citation by the Secretary of Labor under the Occupational Safety Act to employers of individuals who perform rescues of individuals in imminent danger as a result of a life-threatening accident, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources. By
 
The speaker is BAUCUS: and he says  S. 1794. A bill to designate the Federal building located at the corner of North 29th Street and Fourth Avenue North in Billings, Montana, as the ``William J. Jameson Federal Building'', and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. By
 
The speaker is BROWN and he says  (for himself, Dole, Packwood, D'Amato, Simpson, Warner, Gramm, Stevens, Cochran, McCain, Gorton, Burns, McConnell, Murkowski, Nickles, Hutchison, and Pressler): S. 1795. A bill to amend title IV of the Social Security Act and other provisions to provide reforms to the welfare system in effect in the United States; to the Committee on Finance. By
 
The speaker is GRAMM and he says  (for himself, McCain, Coats, Coverdell, Hutchison, Helms, Lott, Faircloth, Wallop, Bennett, and Brown): S. 1796. A bill to ensure that health coverage is portable and renewable, to enhance the ability of small businesses to purchase health care, to enhance efficiency through paperwork reduction, to provide antitrust reforms, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources. By
 
The speaker is KOHL and he says  (for himself and Feingold): S. 1797. A bill to require the Secretary of Transportation to amend the existing regulations applicable to charter flights to the Super Bowl to apply the requirements of such regulations to charter flights to inter-collegiate football games designated as bowl games and to the basketball games among the last 4 teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's division I championship basketball tournaments; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. By
 
The speaker is BRADLEY: and he says  S. 1798. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to increase the tax on handguns and assault weapons and to impose a tax on the transfer of handguns and assault weapons, to increase the license application fee for gun dealers, and to use the proceeds from those increases to pay for medical care for gunshot victims; to the Committee on Finance. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  (for himself and Dole): S. Res. 177. A resolution informing the President of the United States that a quorum of each House is assembled; considered and agreed to. By
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  (for himself and Dole): S. Res. 178. A resolution informing the House of Representatives that a quorum of the Senate is assembled; considered and agreed to. ____________________
 
The speaker is McCONNELL: and he says  S. 1787. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for the tax-free treatment of education savings accounts established through certain State programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. the education trust fund savings act
 
The speaker is McCONNELL and he says  President, I rise today to introduce the Higher Education Trust Fund Savings Act, a bill that will help American families defray the rapidly increasing costs of higher education. I find it alarming that education costs have become the greatest barrier for students who want to attend college. President, there isn't a corporate or civic leader in this country who will dispute the fact that this Nation's future success is dependent on the education of our children today. Not only do we need to train our future scientists and business leaders, but we need to provide service personnel and traditional blue collar occupations with skill development. Vocational training is critical to our ability to rapidly adapt to technological developments which directly affect the competitiveness of U.S. businesses. I am disappointed to report, however, that for many families an affordable education is unrealistic. Students are forced to burden themselves with tens of thousands of dollars in loans or aid. In fact, in 1990, 56 percent of all students accepted financial assistance and the average was higher for minority students. As a parent of two college students, I know only too well the costs associated with higher education. I was forced to take out a second mortgage on my home in order to help meet the costs of their education. President, I know that I am lucky compared to some. It is not uncommon for parents to take a second job in order to help meet the tuition and financial obligations. Many times, students are restricted to attending part time or are forced to put off their education altogether due to financial difficulty. Since 1992, Kentucky students have faced two tuition hikes. The two largest public universities have been forced by budgetary pressures to increase tuition by 11 percent; and community college students were asked to pay a 14-percent increase. Lance Dowdy, the student government president at the University of Kentucky, hit the nail on the head when he said, ``Public education is starting to look like a privilege.'' We cannot afford to let this happen. This bill will amend the Tax Code to maximize investment in State- sponsored education savings plans. It will permit an individual's investment in a State-sponsored savings program to be exempt from Federal taxation when the earnings are used to meet educational costs. The contributions would be after-tax dollars, and any earnings that are not used for educational purposes would be subject to taxation at the individual's current tax rate. In an effort to encourage States to create their own savings plan, this bill also would exempt the State organizations that administer such programs from Federal taxation. This would reduce administrative expenses, thus increasing investment in education. Thirty-four States have already established some form of education savings plan for their residents. This legislation will not force States to establish their own education trust fund or saddle a State with additional costs involuntarily. It merely provides States with an opportunity to invest in the future. I am confident that upon passage of this bill, more States will seek to establish a savings vehicle for their residents. Lastly, this legislation would exempt from Federal taxation, corporate and individual endowments to the trust fund. This provision is unique because it also provides an incentive for corporations to help finance the education of the next leaders of this country. The added investment will boost the return to the students, thus further reducing the cost of education. In Kentucky, there is already a State-sponsored savings plan in effect and working quite well. However, there are several Federal tax concerns that have impeded the growth and full utilization of this program. I have worked one-on-one with the Kentucky Higher Education Assistance Authority in drafting this legislation, and I believe we have a winning package that will benefit education and students alike. I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting this legislation. ______ By
 
The speaker is GRAMM: and he says  S. 1788. A bill to authorize negotiation of free trade agreements with the countries of the Americas, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. the american free-trade act
 
The speaker is GRAMM and he says  President, today I am introducing the American Free- Trade Act. This legislation builds on our success with the North American Free-Trade Agreement. It sets up a procedure whereby the President would begin negotiations with any or all of the countries of the Western Hemisphere with a goal of achieving a free-trade area from the Arctic to the Antarctic. The bill has special procedures to deal with Cuba. It says that once Cuba is liberated from Castro, once there is a constitutionally guaranteed democratic government, once private property rights have been restored and protected, once Cuba has a convertible currency, once free speech and free press are protected, and all the political prisoners are released, then we could begin at that point to negotiate with Cuba. Indeed, priority would be given to our negotiations with a free Cuba. I believe that we are going to create jobs, growth, and opportunity in North America with NAFTA. I think these are benefits that can and should be extended to all the Americas, so that any person working in any hut in any village in the Americas could produce any good or service and sell it anywhere else. This would be a great act that would promote freedom and democracy in the Americas, that would promote prosperity. It is a very important goal, and I am happy to introduce this bill today. This may sound visionary to some people. Five years ago, when I was talking about a free-trade agreement with Mexico and with Canada, many thought that I sounded too visionary. Today that vision is the law of the land. President, I ask unanimous consent that a summary of the American Free-Trade Act be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: The American Free-Trade Act summary I. The President is directed to undertake negotiations to establish free trade agreements between the United States and countries of the Western Hemisphere. Agreements may be bilateral or multilateral. II. The President, before seeking a free trade agreement with Cuba under the Act, would have to certify (1) that freedom has been restored in Cuba, and (2) that the claims of U.S. citizens for compensation for expropriated property have been appropriately addressed. The President could make the certification that freedom has been restored in Cuba only if he determines that-- A. constitutionally guaranteed democratic government has been established in Cuba, with leaders freely and fairly elected; B. private property rights have been restored and are effectively protected and broadly exercised; C. Cuba has a convertible currency; D. all political prisoners have been released; and E. free speech and freedom of the press are effectively guaranteed. If the President certifies that freedom has been restored to Cuba, priority will be given to the negotiation of a free trade agreement with Cuba. III. Congressional fast track procedures for consideration of any such agreement (i.e. expedited consideration, no amendments), are extended permanently. ______ By
 
The speaker is BUMPERS: and he says  S. 1790. A bill entitled ``the National Peace Reauthorization Act''; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. national peace reauthorization act
 
The speaker is BUMPERS and he says  President, in 1987 Congress authorized and the President signed into law legislation to authorize the creation of a National Peace Garden in Washington, DC. The purpose of the Peace Garden is to honor the commitment of the people in the United States to world peace. This unique monument will not only honor past achievements but help inspire future efforts for peace--both in this country and throughout the world. Unfortunately, construction of this memorial was held up for several years because of disagreements over its proposed design. As many of my colleagues know, getting a design concept approved for a memorial is often a long and difficult process and requires the approval of both the Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital Planning Commission. Fortunately, final approval for the design concept was received last July and a national fundraising campaign has been launched for the project. Because of the delay in securing design approval, the National Peace Garden now needs to extend its construction authority for an additional 3 years. Today, I am introducing legislation to give them this extension. President, I urge my colleagues to support this legislation and allow work on this memorial to move forward. Similar legislation has already been passed by the House and I hope will be favorably considered by the Senate. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: S. 1790 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATION FOR PEACE GARDEN. (a) Notwithstanding section 10 (b) of Public Law 99-652, as amended (40 U.S.C. 1010 (b)), the authority of the National Peace Garden to establish the garden known as the ``Peace Garden'' in accordance with Public Law 100-63 (40 U.S.C. 1003 note) shall expire on June 30, 1997. (b)(1) The Congress finds that the Peace Garden Project, Incorporated, has changed its name to the National Peace Garden. (2) Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the Peace Garden Project, Incorporated shall be deemed to be a reference to the National Peace Garden.'' ______ By
 
The speaker is BAUCUS: and he says  S. 1794. A bill to designate the Federal building located at the corner of North 29th Street and Fourth Avenue North in Billings, Montana, as the ``William J. Jameson Federal Building'', and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. william j. jameson federal building act of 1994
 
The speaker is BAUCUS and he says  President. I introduce legislation to name the new Federal building in Billings, MT after the late Judge William J. Jameson. Judge Jameson was an renowned Montana jurist, respected for his integrity, dedication, wisdom, and contribution to the law. Born August 8, 1898, in Butte, MT, Jameson also lived in Roundup as a youngster. During his early years, teachers and family knew Bill was someone special. He exhibited an uncommon devotion to learning, and from an early age knew he wanted to be a lawyer. At the age of 17, he entered the University of Montana, matriculating to the university's law school once his undergraduate work was complete. One year after graduating from law school, he married Mildred Lore of Billings. Mildred was a source of inspiration and support to Bill throughout his career. Jameson was active in the Montana Republican party. In 1926, while an attorney with the Billings law firm Johnston, Coleman & Johnston, he ran a successful campaign for the Montana legislature. According to Journey With the Law, a book about Judge Jameson by Lawrence F. Small, his entire election campaign cost $35.00. Jameson served two terms in Helena, and became known for his strong support for the State's higher education system. This support was critical to bringing higher education to Billings, with Eastern Montana College opening in 1927. After his years in the legislature, Jameson returned to his Billings firm and continued his work as a trial attorney. He received high marks from judges and fellow attorneys for his exceptional abilities. Jameson joined the Montana Bar Association soon after graduating from law school, and was elected to serve as the M.B.A. president from 1936 to 1937. He also contributed to the community. He gave generously of his time to numerous educational and community organizations in Montana. In 1953, a prestigious honor came Jameson's way. He was elected president of the American Bar Association during a tumultuous time in American history, the era of McCarthyism and of Brown versus Board of Education of Topeka. During his year-long term, Jameson helped to eliminate racial restrictions for membership in the American Bar Association. Jameson also served as a member of the Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws; president of the American Judicature Society and the American Law Institute; chairman of the American Bar Endowment board of directors, of the Committee on Standards for the Administration of Criminal Justice, and of the American Bar Association section of judicial administration. Soon after his term as A.B.A. president, President Eisenhower nominated Jameson to be a U.S. District Judge for Montana. Like the trial attorneys Jameson had faced in court, judges thought highly of Judge Jameson. His reasoned decisions were much respected by members of the bench. Judge Jameson's love for the law triggered his decision to continue his judicial career as a senior judge after being eligible for full retirement in 1969. In this capacity, he was widely sought after for the next 20 years to sit on Courts of appeals for various Federal circuits. In 1973, Jameson was awarded the A.B.A. medal, the association's highest accolade, given for ``conspicuous service in the cause of American jurisprudence.'' Jameson joined Oliver Wendell Holmes and Felix Frankfurter, among others, in receiving this award. Judge Jameson was so economical in his stewardship of Federal funds and so diligent in his work habits that it was said at his funeral that if all Federal employees worked as hard and were as frugal as he, there would be no Federal deficit. Judge Jameson, President, contributed much to our system of jurisprudence. His passion for the law, and his balanced approach to the law, have served us all. Montanans are proud to call Judge Jameson one of their own. For this reason, I am particularly honored to introduce legislation to name the new Federal building in Billings after the judge. It is a well-deserved tribute. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the measure be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: S. 1794 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. DESIGNATION OF WILLIAM J. JAMESON FEDERAL BUILDING. The Federal building located at the corner of North 29th Street and Fourth Avenue North in Billings, Montana, shall be known and designated as the ``William J. Jameson Federal Building''. SEC. 2. REFERENCES. Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the Federal building referred to in section 1 shall be deemed to be a reference to the ``William J. Jameson Federal Building''. ______ By Brown (for himself, Dole, Packwood, D'Amato, Simpson, Warner, Gramm, Stevens, Cochran, McCain, Gorton, Burns, McConnell, Murkowski, Nickles, Hutchison and Pressler): S. 1795. A bill to amend title IV of the Social Security Act and other provisions to provide reforms to the welfare system in effect in the United States; to the Committee on Finance. welfare reform act of 1994
 
The speaker is BROWN and he says  President, in November, Senate Republicans promised to introduce a welfare reform bill on the first day of this session. Today, with Senator Dole and 14 other Senators as cosponsors, I'm here to keep that promise and to introduce a Senate Republican welfare reform bill. Americans believe in work. Work is the key to success, opportunity, fulfillment, and growth. Work encourages accomplishment and self- respect. To reform welfare, we must encourage work. The welfare reform we Senate Republicans propose focuses on opportunity to move out of poverty. The Brown/Dole bill requires job search by adults applying for Aid for Families with Dependent Children. It requires able-bodied job-ready adults to work for their welfare benefits. For those who don't have the skills or education to hold a job, we require them to get the remedial education and job skills training necessary for one. The Brown/Dole bill gives States the option of ``two years and off'' for adult AFDC recipients. For the welfare recipient, the bill allows them to exchange welfare benefits for a job. AFDC and food stamp benefits can literally be taken in voucher form and exchanged for a job with a private employer. Under this program, the welfare recipient receives a job that pays at least double the welfare benefits. The employer receives the voucher which they can redeem to help pay for the cost of training the employee. The Government saves money by receiving taxes on the income of the new employee. In 1988, when I was in the House, we made a step toward changing our welfare system to encourage work in the Family Support Act. When the Senate passed a work requirement in its 1988 welfare reform package, the groundwork was set to get it through the House and enacted into law. It was the Republicans in both the House and Senate who thought of it and accomplished it. This bill takes the work requirements we started in 1988 in the Family Support Act and builds on them. The Brown/Dole bill requires at least one parent in two-parent AFDC families to work for the benefits. It requires non-custodial parents whose children are on welfare to pay court-ordered child support or to participate in welfare work programs. With work, the Senate Republican welfare reforms also focus on parental responsibility. The Brown/Dole bill requires teenage mothers to live at home, or in a supervised group home, to be eligible for AFDC benefits. It also gives States the option to deny cash welfare benefits to teen mothers or for children conceived while the mother is on AFDC. The Senate Republican welfare reform proposal changes the law so a mother does not get her portion of cash AFDC benefits until she has fully cooperated in getting her children's paternity legally established. It encourages States to establish uniform forms and systems for wage withholding of child support and to honor other States' child support orders. In developing this legislation, we've talked to several Governors and State legislators about flexibility for States in designing welfare programs. The Senate Republican welfare reform bill allows States to impose several welfare requirements without getting a waiver from the Federal Government. Under this bill, States can impose childhood immunization and school attendance requirements, limit benefits to new State residents to the same level as they received in the previous State for 1 year, encourage educational savings accounts for children and eliminate the welfare penalty if a mother marries a man not the father of her children. The bill also would standardize and streamline the process for States to get exemptions from Federal welfare requirements. Lastly, the Senate Republican welfare reform bill would put limits on who can get welfare, but do so recognizing the various needs of our citizens and our communities. In the Brown/Dole bill, we have included a provision specifically stating that illegal aliens are not eligible for welfare benefits, except emergency medical. For legal aliens, their sponsor's income is deemed available to them until they become naturalized U.S. citizens and legal aliens who receive 12 months of welfare benefits are required to be reported to the Immigration and Naturalization Service for possible deportation as a public charge. Welfare recipients addicted to drugs or alcohol, under this bill, are required to participate in rehabilitation program and undergo random drug tests to remain eligible. Persons found innocent by reason of insanity would not be eligible for disability benefits based on their mental condition. This bill is just a beginning of our work on welfare reform. There are other welfare programs, outside the scope of this bill, that desperately need changing. Food stamps, job training, and day care are just a few of the programs we need to work on to give people the help they need to get into a real job and off welfare. I pledge to work with my colleagues, on both sides of the aisle, to further strengthen the Brown/Dole bill and to work on other bills reforming other parts of our welfare system. Finally, we must address the overall cost of all the welfare programs. Our country cannot continue to spend and increase the deficit in programs that don't help people become productive members of society. The vehicle for addressing these overall cost concerns will soon be before us in the budget resolution. With Senators Faircloth, Grassley, and Gorton, I will be working toward reasonable caps on welfare spending.
 
The speaker is DOLE and he says  President, I am pleased to join with my distinguished colleague, Senator Brown, in introducing a real welfare reform bill. As part of his campaign, President Clinton promised to ``End welfare as we know it,'' yet a year has gone by and Americans are still waiting for his proposal. Right now--too many Americans who receive welfare assistance need to be set free from the chains that bind them to a dependency on government handouts. Handouts that often destroy their self- sufficiency. Republicans have responded to this welfare crisis with leadership-- action has been taken by our Republican Governors, by Republican Members of the House of Representatives and right here in the U.S. Senate. Our emphasis has been on ending welfare as a way of life--by strengthening real work requirements for able-bodied adults who receive government assistance and by encouraging parental responsibility. The Republican proposals recognize the human despair of those in need, while at the same time, taking a real look at who needs welfare and what should be the responsibilities of those who receive cash assistance. This country was built on the American dream--not the assurance of a free ride. President, the legislation that Senator Brown has introduced today asks welfare recipients to commit to what made this country great--the American work ethic. And it builds upon the landmark progress that was made when President Ronald Reagan signed into law the 1988 Family Support Act--a hard fought bipartisan agreement. The Senate contributed to this effort by passing a visionary work requirement which also was approved in the House. More specifically, this legislation takes another step toward encouraging those on welfare to work. It gives the States the authority to end welfare after 2 years for all able-bodied recipients. That's right. Two years and off. No more temptation to rely on lifelong government benefit programs that have become a permanent crutch for many Americans when these people can become self-sufficient. Too many times these benefits have become the crutch that contributes to broken families, the loss of personal dignity and at the same time costing taxpayers billions of dollars a year. Moreover, the bill emphasizes parental responsibility and allows increased State flexibility to address these local problems and respond to the rapid increase in illegitimacy. The Federal Government has a role to play in setting tough rules that establish priorities. For example, the Federal Government will require unmarried minor mothers on aid to families with dependent children [AFDC], a major welfare program, to live with their parents, guardians, or in a group home. We believe this will help establish a family environment--clearly an important benefit over the long term. States have a lot to contribute in the design of new ways to address existing problems--so new flexibility will be given. For example, States will have the option to deny AFDC cash benefits to unmarried minor mothers or to deny additional cash benefits for children conceived while the mother is on welfare. Right now--we must seize the opportunity to fix this broken system. A system that exists where 1 out of 7 American children are on welfare. Republicans want able-bodied Americans to have a temporary safety net and then earn a fair shot at joining the mainstream of society. We want to provide the children of America the future they deserve. ______ By
 
The speaker is KOHL and he says  (for himself and Feingold): S. 1797. A bill to require the Secretary of Transportation to amend the existing regulations applicable to charter flights to the Super Bowl to apply the requirements of such regulations to charter flights to inter-collegiate football games designated as bowl games and to the basketball games among the last 4 teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's division I championship basketball tournaments; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. amending charter flight regulations
 
The speaker is KOHL and he says  President, this year, when thousands of eager University of Wisconsin Badgers fans bought plane tickets to go to the Rose Bowl to cheer their hometown team to victory, they had no reason to believe that they'd have to watch the event on TV. Or did they? It has been estimated that as many as 2,000 Wisconsin residents who purchased Rose Bowl ``packages'' from charter services arrived in California only to learn that the game tickets they had been promised did not exist. While some of these people were able to secure last minute tickets at exorbitant prices, hundreds of those had to watch the event on TV in a room nearby the stadium. While U.S. Department of Transportation regulations exist to prevent this from happening at the Super Bowl, these regulations do not apply to other events. The DOT regulations (14 CFR 380.18a) require that an operator marketing a Super Bowl air package that includes game tickets must have the tickets in hand or have a written contract for the tickets before the operator does any advertising. The legislation that I am introducing today would require the Secretary of Transportation to apply these Super Bowl regulations to Rose Bowl games and to NCAA ``Final Four'' tournaments. It is my hope that this legislation will result in the regulatory changes necessary to protect the consumer. I welcome Senator Feingold as an original cosponsor of this legislation, and note that Congressman Klug is introducing the same legislation in the House. I ask unanimous consent that the full text of the bill be included in the Record. There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: S. 1797 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. REGULATION OF CHARTERS. The Secretary of Transportation shall amend part 380.18a of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations to apply the requirements contained in such regulation to charter flights going to-- (1) inter-collegiate football games designated as bowl games; and (2) basketball games among the last 4 teams in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's division 1 championship basketball tournaments.
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, I rise today to join my colleague, Senator Kohl in introducing a bill to require the Secretary of Transportation to amend the existing regulations applicable to charter flights, to extend those rules to collegiate bowl games and NCAA final four basketball games. As you know, the University of Wisconsin football team appeared in the 1994 Rose Bowl for the first time in over 30 years; and I am proud to add they were victorious. As Rose Bowl fever swept the State following the regular season, tens of thousands of Badger fans sought out ways to get to Pasadena. Indeed, tens of thousands of Badger fans did actually get to Pasadena and attend the game. Many of those loyal fans made their travel and game plans through agents and companies selling charter flight and Rose Bowl ticket packages. Upon their arrival in California they found that the tickets that they paid for were unavailable, or were priced significantly higher than they believed to be the case when they booked and paid for the charter package. So while over 60,000 Badger fans were inside the Rose Bowl on New Year's Day, thousands were relegated to viewing the game on television at hastily erected tents outside the stadium or in hotels and bars-- great economic development for Pasadena, but no consolation for paying Wisconsin Badger fans. Charter and ticket scams have occurred before, and especially in relation to major sporting events. It's happened at the Super Bowl and at other bowl games in the past. Some States protect citizens against scalping and other forms of ticket fraud, while others don't. Where such consumer protection laws do exist, detection and enforcement vary widely. We already have a no-cost solution to the problem, and that is part 380.18A of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, which requires charter operators to prove that they have possession of the appropriate number of game tickets before they advertise. Currently, however, the rule only applies to Super Bowl games. This bill amends the rule, and extends its requirements to charter flights going to intercollegiate bowl games and the games of the last 4 teams of the NCAA's division 1 basketball tournament. It's simple, it's effective, it's fair, it's time. ______ By
 
The speaker is BRADLEY: and he says  S. 1798. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to increase the tax on handguns and assault weapons and to impose a tax on the transfer of handguns and assault weapons, to increase the license application fee for gun dealers, and to use the proceeds from those increases to pay for medical care for gunshot victims; to the Committee on Finance. gun violence health care cost prevention act
 
The speaker is BRADLEY and he says  President, I rise today to introduce the Gun Violence Health Care Costs Prevention Act, a bill to reduce the public's share of the health care costs associated with gunshot injuries by significantly increasing the taxes and licensing fees associated with the sale and purchase of handguns, assault weapons, and the ammunition for these firearms. The high rate of gun-related violence is wreaking havoc with our health care system. Every 14 minutes someone in the United States dies from a gunshot. The total lifetime costs associated with firearm deaths and injuries were over $20 billion in 1990. We spend an estimated $3 billion a year treating firearm injuries, and 80 percent of the cost of hospitalization for these injuries is paid by public funds. Although handguns and assault weapons cost the Government millions of dollars in health care each year, the dealers and consumers of these firearms do not pay their fair share. Instead, the American public must foot the bill. The bill I introduce today increases the fees for most 3-year Federal firearms dealer licenses to $3,000. It also increase the manufacturer's excise tax on handguns, assault weapons, and the ammunition for these firearms to 30 percent. In addition, it establishes a new 30-percent Federal sales and transfer tax to cover sales of these instruments by gun dealers to retail customers. Finally, this bill puts the processed from these tax and licensing fee increases into a trust fund for the support of trauma centers and hospitals that have incurred substantial uncompensated costs while treating gunshot victims. If enacted, this bill will shift some of the health care cost of firearms- related injuries away from the American public to the dealers and consumers of guns. There are currently over 209 million firearms in the United States, 71 million of which are handguns. Although handguns make up less than one-third of all firearms, they are involved in two-thirds of the gun murders that occur each year. Assault weapons account for a much smaller percentage of total firearms, but they have become weapons of choice for some criminals, giving them the ability to pump bullets into people at devastatingly fast and intense levels. There are currently 280,000 federally licensed dealers in the United States, as compared to 155,000 grocery stores and 210,000 gas stations. According to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 90,000 new or renewed dealers licenses are issued each year. The current cost of a new 3-year Federal firearms dealer license is $30, a cost which has not changed since 1968. When the Brady bill goes into effect next month, the cost will still only be $200 for a new license and $90 for subsequent licenses. Significant increases in the gun dealer licensing fee would dramatically reduce the number of Federal firearms dealers, raise the amount of public funds available to treat firearms-related injuries, and bring the cost of handguns, assault weapons, and the ammunition for these firearms more in line with their cost to our society. It is not my intention to restrict the use of the firearms which are appropriate for legitimate recreational purposes. It is my goal, however, to acknowledge the important link between certain firearms and the high health care costs associated with gun violence. I urge my colleagues to cosponsor it. I ask unanimous consent to include the text of this legislation and a bill summary in the Record. I yield the floor. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the ``Gun Violence Health Care Costs Prevention Act''. SEC. 2. FINDINGS. The Congress finds that-- (1) there are currently over 209,000,000 firearms in the United States, 71,000,000 of which are handguns and 1,000,000 of which are semi-automatic assault weapons; (2) there are now over 280,000 federally licensed gun dealers in the United States, as compared to 155,000 grocery stores and 210,000 gas stations; (3) a Federal firearms dealer's license allows the licensee to purchase firearms wholesale across State lines; (4) according to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, American taxpayers annually pay more than $28,000,000 in subsidies to operate the Federal firearms dealer licensing system; (5) each year more than 24,000 Americans (65 Americans a day) are killed with handguns, either in homicides, by committing suicide, or by unintentional injuries; (6) handguns account for only one-third of all firearms in the United States, but account for two-thirds of all firearm- related deaths; (7) in 1991, the United States led the developed world with 14,373 gun murders, as compared to 186 gun murders in Canada, 76 gun murders in Australia, 60 gun murders in England, and 74 gun murders in Japan; (8) in 1991, there were 11,497 murders committed with handguns, as compared to 745 murders committed with rifles, 1,124 murders committed with shotguns, and 3,430 murders committed with knives; (9) every 14 minutes someone in the United States dies from a gunshot; (10) in 1989, there were over 240,000 nonfatal firearms injuries; (11) 95 percent of the persons injured each year by a handgun require emergency care or hospitalization; (12) firearms injuries, fatal and nonfatal, are the third most costly type of injury overall; (13) the total lifetime costs associated with firearm deaths and injuries were $14,400,000,000 in 1985, increased to at least $16,200,000,000 by 1988, and increased to $20,400,000,000 by 1990; (14) the health care cost of firearm-related injuries is approximately $3,000,000,000 a year; (15) public funds pay for over 80 percent of the cost of hospitalization for firearms injuries, excluding professional fees and the cost of ambulance, physical therapy, and other rehabilitative services; (16) youngsters carry an estimated 270,000 guns to school every day; (17) gun violence is a major public health problem and handguns, assault weapons, and the ammunition for these firearms are major health hazards; (18) the cost of firearms and firearms dealers licenses should reflect the health costs of firearms to our society; (19) the Federal taxes on handguns, assault weapons, and the ammunition for these firearms should be significantly increased to partially offset the health care costs of gun violence; (20) the fees required for Federal firearms dealer's licenses should be significantly increased to partially offset the health care costs of gun violence; and (21) the increased Federal taxes should not be imposed on firearms and ammunition which are recognized as particularly suitable for, or readily adaptable to, sporting purposes. SEC. 3. LICENSE APPLICATION FEES FOR DEALERS IN FIREARMS. (a) In General.--Section 923(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3) and inserting: ``(B) who is not a dealer in destructive devices, a fee of $3,000 for 3 years (including renewals).''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new flush sentence: ``There are hereby appropriated to the Gun Violence Trauma Care Trust Fund established under section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9512) 93 percent of the revenues from fees collected under paragraph (3)(B) for original licenses and 97 percent of the revenues from such fees for renewal licenses.'' (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to license applications (including renewals) filed after the 180th day after the date of the enactment of this Act. SEC. 4. INCREASE IN TAX ON HANDGUNS AND ASSAULT WEAPONS. (a) Increase in Manufacturer's Tax.-- (1) In general.--Part III of subchapter D of chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on firearms) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC. 4183. IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL TAX ON HANDGUNS AND ASSAULT WEAPONS. ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--In addition to any tax imposed by section 4181, there is hereby imposed upon the sale by the manufacturer, producer, or importer of any of the following articles a tax equivalent to the specified percentage of the price for which so sold: ``Articles taxable at 20 percent.-- ``Handguns. ``Articles taxable at 19 percent.-- ``Semiautomatic assault weapons. ``Shells and cartridges used in handguns and semiautomatic assault weapons. ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of subsection (a)-- ``(1) Handgun.--The term `handgun' means any pistol or revolver. ``(2) Semiautomatic assault weapon.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `semiautomatic assault weapon' means-- ``(i) any of the semiautomatic firearms known as-- ``(I) A.A. Arms AP-9; ``(II) Auto-Ordnance Thompson; ``(III) Barrett Light-Fifty; ``(IV) Beretta AR-70; ``(V) Bushmaster Auto Rifle; ``(VI) Calico M-900 and M-950; ``(VII) Cobray, Ingram and RPB MAC-10 and MAC-11; ``(VIII) Colt AR-15 and Sporter; ``(IX) Encom MP-9 and MP-45; ``(X) Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR, and FNC; ``(XI) Feather AT-9; ``(XII) Federal XP900 and XP450; ``(XIII) Franchi SPAS-12; ``(XIV) Intratec TEC-9 and TEC-22; ``(XV) Israeli Military Industries UZI and Galil; ``(XVI) Iver Johnson Enforcer 3000; ``(XVII) Norinco, Mitchell and Poly Technologies Avtomat Kalashnikovs; ``(XVIII) Steyr AUG; or ``(XIX) USAS-12; ``(ii) a revolving-cylinder shotgun such as or similar to the Street Sweeper or Striker 12; and ``(iii) a semiautomatic firearm designated by the Secretary as a semiautomatic assault weapon under subsection (c). ``(B) Exceptions.--The term `semiautomatic assault weapon' does not include (among other firearms)-- ``(i) any of the firearms known as-- ``(I) Remington Model 1100 shotgun; ``(II) Remington Model 7400 rifle; ``(III) Mossberg Model 5500 shotgun; ``(IV) HK Model 300 rifle; ``(V) Marlin Model 9 camp carbine; ``(VI) Browning High-Power rifle; or ``(VII) Remington Nylon 66 auto loading rifle; ``(ii) a firearm that is a manually operated bolt action firearm; ``(iii) a lever action firearm; ``(iv) a slide action firearm; or ``(v) a firearm that has been rendered permanently inoperable. ``(3) Shells and cartridges.-- ``(A) Handguns.--The term `cartridges used in handguns' includes-- ``(i) any centerfire cartridge which has a cartridge case less than 1.3 inches in length, ``(ii) any cartridge case which is less than 1.3 inches in length, or ``(iii) any other ammunition listed under subsection (c)(1)(B) as likely to be used in a handgun. ``(B) Semiautomatic assault weapons.--The term `shells or cartridges used in semiautomatic assault weapons' means any shells, cartridges, magazines, or other ammunition which is listed under subsection (c)(1)(B) as likely to be used in a semiautomatic assault weapon. ``(c) Designation of Semiautomatic Assault Weapons and Taxable Ammunition.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall-- ``(A) determine whether any other semiautomatic firearm (other than a firearm described in subsection (b)(2)(B)) should be designated as a semiautomatic assault weapon in addition to those previously designated by subsection (b)(2)(A) or by the Secretary under this subsection, and ``(B) publish a list of shells and cartridges which are likely to be used in handguns and semiautomatic assault weapons. ``(2) Criteria.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall by regulation designate as a semiautomatic assault weapon a rifle, pistol, or shotgun that is a semiautomatic firearm and that is described in paragraph (3), (4), (5), or (6). ``(3) Replicas or duplicates.--A replica or duplicate in any caliber of a semiautomatic firearm described in subsection (b)(2)(A)(i) is a semiautomatic assault weapon. ``(4) Certain nonsporting firearms.--A rifle that is a semiautomatic firearm is a semiautomatic assault weapon if it-- ``(A) is not generally recognized as being particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes, ``(B) has an ability to accept a detachable magazine, and ``(C) has at least 2 of the following characteristics: ``(i) A folding or telescoping stock. ``(ii) A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon. ``(iii) A bayonet mount. ``(iv) A flash suppressor or threaded barrel designed to accommodate a flash suppressor. ``(v) A grenade launcher. ``(5) Certain Pistols.--A pistol that is a semiautomatic firearm is a semiautomatic assault weapon if it-- ``(A) is not generally recognized as being particularly suitable for or adaptable to sporting purposes, ``(B) has an ability to accept a detachable magazine, and ``(C) has at least 2 of the following characteristics: ``(i) An ammunition magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of the pistol grip. ``(ii) A threaded barrel capable of accepting a barrel extender, flash suppressor, forward hand grip, or silencer. ``(iii) A shroud that is attached to or partially or completely encircles the barrel and that permits the shooter to hold the firearm with the second hand without being burned. ``(iv) A manufactured weight of 50 ounces or more when the pistol is unloaded. ``(v) A semiautomatic version of an automatic firearm. ``(6) Certain shotguns.--A shotgun that is a semiautomatic firearm is a semiautomatic assault weapon if it-- ``(A) is not generally recognized as being particularly suitable for or adaptable to sporting purposes, and ``(B) has at least 2 of the following characteristics: ``(i) A folding or telescoping stock. ``(ii) A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon. ``(iii) A fixed magazine capacity in excess of 6 rounds. ``(iv) An ability to accept a detachable magazine.'' (2) Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 4182(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or 4183'' after ``section 4181''. (B) Paragraph (6) of section 6091(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 4181'' and inserting ``section 4181 or 4183''. (C) The table of sections for part III of subchapter D of chapter 32 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec. 4183. Imposition of additional tax on handguns and assault weapons.'' (b) Tax on Subsequent Sales or Transfers Involving Assault Weapons and Handguns.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 31 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter D--Handguns and Semiautomatic Assault Weapons ``Sec. 4056. Handguns and semiautomatic assault weapons. ``SEC. 4056. HANDGUNS AND SEMIAUTOMATIC ASSAULT WEAPONS. ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed on any sale, transfer, or other disposition by any person of a handgun, semiautomatic assault weapon, or shells and cartridges used in handguns and semiautomatic assault weapons a tax equal to 30 percent of the price for which sold, transferred, or disposed of. ``(b) Credit for Tax Previously Imposed.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of the 1st retail sale of any article, and any sale, transfer, or disposition preceding the 1st retail sale, the amount of tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of tax imposed by this section, section 4181, or section 4183 on any preceding sale, transfer, or disposition of the article. ``(2) Refunds.--If a taxpayer establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary that tax was imposed in excess of the amount due, the Secretary shall pay (without interest) to the taxpayer the amount of such excess. ``(3) Requirements.--No reduction or refund shall be made under this subsection unless the taxpayer meets such requirements as the Secretary may prescribe with respect to proof of payment of tax for any prior sale, transfer, or disposition. ``(c) Exceptions.-- ``(1) Coordination with manufacturer's tax.--No tax shall be imposed under subsection (a) on a sale, transfer, or disposition of an article if tax is imposed under section 4181 or 4183 with respect to such sale, transfer, or disposition. ``(2) Defense department.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) on any sale described in section 4182(b). ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms `handgun', `semiautomatic assault weapon', and `shells and cartridges used in handguns and semiautomatic assault weapons' have the meanings given such terms by section 4183(b).'' (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 31 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Subchapter D--Handguns and Semiautomatic Assault Weapons.'' (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales, transfers, and other dispositions after the 180th day after the date of the enactment of this Act. SEC. 5. GUN VIOLENCE TRAUMA CARE TRUST FUND. (a) In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC. 9512. GUN VIOLENCE TRAUMA CARE TRUST FUND. ``(a) Establishment of the Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Gun Violence Trauma Care Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b). ``(b) Transfers to the Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Gun Violence Trauma Care Trust Fund amounts equivalent to-- ``(1) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4056, ``(2) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4183, and ``(3) the amounts described in the last sentence of section 923(a) of title 18, United States Code. ``(c) Expenditures From the Trust Fund.--Funds in the Gun Violence Trauma Care Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriations Acts, only-- ``(1) for the purpose of making grants to assist hospitals, trauma centers, or other health care providers that have incurred substantial uncompensated costs in providing medical care to gunshot victims, or ``(2) in the event a national health program is established which compensates for those costs, for the purpose of reimbursing that program for its costs in providing the compensation. ``(d) Eligibility for Trust Fund Moneys.--A hospital, trauma center, or other health care provider is eligible to apply for grants from the Trust Fund for any calendar year if the hospital, trauma center, or health care provider-- ``(1) is in compliance with Federal and State certification and licensing requirements; ``(2) is a not-for-profit entity; and ``(3) has incurred substantial uncompensated costs during the previous calendar year in providing medical care to gunshot victims. ``(e) Regulations for Trust Fund.--The Secretary shall, not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section and in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, issue such regulations as are necessary to implement the provisions of this section.'' (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec. 9512. Gun Violence Trauma Care Trust Fund.'' ____ gun violence health care costs prevention act summary First, increases the 3-year Federal firearms dealer licensing fee to $3,000. The current fees are $200 for the initial dealer's license and $90 for subsequent licenses. Before passage of the Brady bill, which goes into effect on February 28, 1994, the cost of a 3-year firearms dealer license was $30, a cost which had not increased since 1968. Increasing the Federal firearms dealer licensing fee to $3,000 would raise and additional $40-60 million and reduce the number of federally licensed firearms dealers from the current figure of 280,000 to between 40,000 and 60,000. Second, increases the Federal manufacturer-producer-importer excise tax to 30 percent for handguns--pistols and revolvers--assault weapons, handgun ammunition, and ammunition used in semiautomatic assault weapons. The current excise tax is 10 percent for handguns and 11 percent for shotguns and rifles. Third, imposes a new 30 percent Federal tax upon all transfers or sales of handguns--pistols and revolvers--assualt weapons, handgun ammunition, and ammunition used in semiautomatic assault weapons. The Joint Tax Committee estimates that the tax increases would raise $1.1 billion in additional revenue over 5 years to offset the health care costs of gun-related violence. Fourth, establishes a gun violence trauma care trust fund and places all revenue generated--over and above that generated by current taxes benefiting the Federal Aid to Wildlife Fund--into the fund for the benefit of hospital trauma centers that treat gunshot victims. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  (for himself and Dole) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed to: S. Res. 177 Resolved, That a committee consisting of two Senators be appointed to join such committee as may be appointed by the House of Representatives to wait upon the President of the United States and inform him that a quorum of each House is assembled and that the Congress is ready to receive any communication he may be pleased to make. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  (for himself and Dole) submitted the following resolution; which was considered and agreed to: S. Res. 178 Resolved, That the Secretary inform the House of Representatives that a quorum of the Senate is assembled and that the Senate is ready to proceed to business. ____________________
 
The speaker is BIDEN and he says  (for himself, Feingold, Pell, Wofford, Kerry, and Helms) proposed an amendment to the bill (S. 1281) to authorize appropriations for the fiscal year 1994 and 1995 for the Department of State, the United States Information Agency, and related agencies, to provide for the consolidation of international broadcasting activities, and for other purposes; as follows: Beginning on page 133, strike out line 1 and all that follows through line 24 on page 149, and insert in lieu thereof the following: TITLE III--UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING ACT OF 1994 SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE. This title may be cited as the ``United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994''. SEC. 302. CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF PURPOSES. The Congress hereby finds and declares that-- (1) it is the policy of the United States to promote the right of opinion and expression, including the freedom ``to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers,'' in accordance with Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; (2) open communication of information and ideas among the peoples of the world contributes to international peace and stability, and that the promotion of such communication is in the interests of the United States; (3) prominent in the implementation of this policy has been United States support for the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Broadcasting to Cuba, which have demonstrated their effectiveness in providing accurate and timely information to the people of the world; (4) the continuation of these broadcasting entities, and the creation of a new broadcasting service to the people of the People's Republic of China and the other communist countries of Asia, would continue the promotion of information and ideas, while advancing the goals of United States foreign policy; and (5) the reorganization and consolidation of these services will achieve important economies and strengthen the capability of the United States to utilize these instrumentalities to support freedom and democracy in a rapidly changing international environment. SEC. 303. ESTABLISHMENT OF BROADCASTING BOARD OF GOVERNORS. (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established within the United States Information Agency a Broadcasting Board of Governors (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Board''). (b) Composition of the Board.--(1) The Board shall consist of 8 members, as follows: (A) Six voting members who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. (B) The Director of the United States Information Agency who shall also be a voting member. (C) The Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau, who shall be an ex officio member of the Board and may not vote in the determinations of the Board. (2) The President shall designate one member (other than the Director of the United States Information Agency) as Chairman of the Board. (3) Exclusive of the Director of the United States Information Agency, not more than three of the members of the Board appointed by the President shall be of the same political party. (c) Term of Office.--The term of office of each member of the Board shall be three years, except that the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau of the United States Information Agency shall remain members of the Board during their respective terms of service. Of the other six voting members, the initial terms of office of two members shall be one year, and the initial terms of office of two other members shall be two years, so that the terms of one-third of these voting members of the Board expire each year. The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, Board members to fill vacancies occurring prior to the expiration of a term, in which case the members so appointed shall serve for the remainder of such term. Any member whose term has expired may serve until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. (d) Selection of Board.--Members of the Board appointed by the President shall be citizens of the United States who are not currently regular full-time employees of the United States Government, except the Director of the United States Information Agency. Such members shall be selected by the President from among Americans distinguished in the fields of mass communications, print, broadcast media or foreign affairs. (e) Compensation.--Members of the Board, while attending meetings of the Board or while engaged in duties relating to such meetings or in other activities of the Board pursuant to this section, including travel time, shall be entitled to receive compensation equal to the daily equivalent of the compensation prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code. While away from their homes or regular places of business they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law (5 U.S.C. 5703) for persons in the Government service employed intermittently. The Director of the United States Information Agency and the Director, International Broadcasting Bureau, United States Information Agency, shall not be entitled to any compensation under this title, but may be allowed travel expenses as provided in the preceding sentence. SEC. 304. FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD. (a) Authorities.--The Board is authorized-- (1) to provide guidance and oversight to the International Broadcasting Bureau; (2) to review and evaluate the mission and operation of the International Broadcasting Bureau and to assess the quality, effectiveness, and professional integrity of its programming within the context of the broad foreign policy objectives of the United States; (3) to review and evaluate, at least annually, the mix of traditional Voice of America programming and surrogate programming and make recommendations to the President, through the Director of the United States Information Agency, regarding the addition or deletion of language services; (4) to make grants to RFE/RL, Incorporated, or to an alternative entity in accordance with section 307(e); (5) to review engineering activities to ensure that all broadcasting elements receive the highest quality and cost- effective delivery services; (6) to undertake such studies as may be necessary to identify areas in which the operations of the International Broadcasting Bureau could be made more efficient and economical; (7) to submit to the President, through the Director of the United States Information Agency, an annual report which summarizes the activities of the Board and evaluates the operations of the International Broadcasting Bureau; (8) to the extent it deems necessary to carry out the functions under this title, procure supplies, services, and other personal property; (9) to appoint such staff personnel for the Board as may be necessary, subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and to fix their compensation in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates; and (10) to make available for its own use, for official reception and representation expenses, such amount as provided for in an annual appropriations which shall not exceed the amount appropriated to the Board for International Broadcasting for such purposes in fiscal year 1993. (b) Implementation.--The Director and the Board, in carrying out the functions of subsection (a), shall respect the professional independence and integrity of the International Broadcasting Bureau and its broadcasting services. SEC. 305. FOREIGN POLICY GUIDANCE. To assist the Board in carrying out its functions, the Secretary of State, acting through the Director of the United States Information Agency, shall provide information and guidance on foreign policy issues to the Board. SEC. 306. INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING BUREAU. (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established an International Broadcasting Bureau within the United States Information Agency (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Bureau''). (b) Organization of the Bureau.--The Bureau, in recognition of and to implement the purposes of this title, shall consist of the following separate elements: (1) The Voice of America. (2) The Office of Surrogate Broadcasting. (3) Such services of the WORLDNET Television and Film Service as determined by the Board with the concurrence of the Director of the United States Information Agency. (4) Engineering and Technical Operations. (5) Such other elements as the Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau may from time to time establish with the concurrence of the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Board. (c) Organization of the Office of Surrogate Broadcasting.-- The Office of Surrogate Broadcasting shall administer the grants for Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Asia and shall administer the Office of Cuba Broadcasting (including Radio Marti and TV Marti), and such other surrogate services as may from time to time be established. (d) Selection of the Director of the Bureau.--(1) The Director of the Bureau shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Board, in consultation with the Director of the United States Information Agency and with the concurrence of a majority of the Board. The Director of the Bureau shall be entitled to receive compensation at the rate now or hereafter prescribed by law for level IV of the Executive Schedule. (2) Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau, the United States Information Agency.''. (e) Separately Identified Appropriation Account.--(1) In any fiscal year, funding for the Board and the Bureau shall be made out of a single appropriations account designated ``International Broadcasting Activities'' or ``International Broadcasting Operations'', as the case may be. (2) The Director of the Bureau shall submit proposals on appropriation of broadcasting funds to the Board. The Board shall forward its recommendations concerning the proposed budget for the Board and the Bureau to the Director of the United States Information Agency for his consideration as a part of the Agency's budget submission to the Office of Management and Budget. (3) The Director of the United States Information Agency shall include in the Agency's submission to the Office of Management and Budget the comments and recommendations of the Board concerning the proposed broadcasting budget. (4) The Board shall allocate funds appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) among the separate elements of the International Broadcasting Bureau, subject to the limitations contained in section 307(d). SEC. 307. GRANTS FOR RADIO FREE EUROPE, RADIO LIBERTY, AND RADIO FREE ASIA. (a) Authority.--The Board is authorized to make annual grants to RFE/RL, Incorporated, for the purpose of operating Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Asia as provided for in sections 308 and 309. (b) Board Structure.--No grant may be made to RFE/RL, Incorporated, unless the certificate of incorporation of RFE/ RL, Incorporated, has been amended to provide that-- (1) the Board of Directors of RFE/RL, Incorporated, shall consist of the members of the Broadcasting Board of Governors established under section 303 and of no other members; (2) such Board of Directors shall make all major policy determinations governing the operation of RFE/RL, Incorporated, and shall appoint and fix the compensation of such managerial officers and employees of RFE/RL, Incorporated, as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the grant provided under this title; and (3) the name of the corporation shall be amended to include reference to Radio Free Asia, and the corporation shall be authorized to carry out the functions described in section 308 with respect to Radio Free Asia. (c) Location of Principal Place of Business.--(1) No grant may be made under this section unless RFE/RL, Incorporated, agrees to locate the headquarters of the corporation and its senior administrative and managerial staff within the metropolitan area of Washington, D.C. (2) Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall provide a report to Congress on the number of administrative, managerial, and technical staff who will be located within the metropolitan area of Washington, D.C., and the number of employees whose principal place of business will be located outside the metropolitan area of Washington, D.C. (d) Limitation on Grant Amounts.--(1) Grants made after September 30, 1995, for the operating costs of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty may not exceed $75,000,000 in any fiscal year. (2) Grants made for the operating costs of Radio Free Asia may not exceed $22,000,000 in any fiscal year. (3) The total amount of grant funds made available for one- time capital costs of Radio Free Asia may not exceed $8,000,000. (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2), if RFE/RL, Incorporated, determines that there is a need to reallocate resources between funds made available for Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Asia, RFE/ RL, Incorporated, may submit a request for the reallocation of such resources to the Board, which may authorize such reallocation after notifying the appropriate congressional committees. (e) Alternative Grantee.--If the Board determines at any time that RFE/RL, Incorporated, is not carrying out the functions described in section 308 or 309 in an effective and economical manner, the Board may award the grant to carry out these functions to another entity after soliciting and considering applications from eligible entities in such manner and accompanied by such information as the Board may reasonably require. (f) Not a Federal Agency or Instrumentality.--Compliance with the requirements of subsection (b) shall not be construed to make such entity a Federal agency or instrumentality. SEC. 308. RADIO FREE ASIA. (a) Authority.--(1) Grants authorized under section 307(a) shall be available to make annual grants for the purpose of carrying out radio broadcasting to the People's Republic of China, Burma, Cambodia, Laos, North Korea, Tibet, or Vietnam. (2) Such surrogate broadcasting service shall be referred to as ``Radio Free Asia''. (b) Functions.--Radio Free Asia shall-- (1) provide accurate and timely information, news, and commentary about events in the respective countries of Asia and elsewhere; and (2) be a forum for a variety of opinions and voices from within Asian nations whose people do not fully enjoy freedom of expression. (c) Submission of Detailed Plan for Radio Free Asia.--(1) No grant may be awarded to carry out this section unless the Board, through the Director of the United States Information Agency, has submitted to Congress and the Comptroller General of the United States a detailed plan for the establishment and operation of Radio Free Asia, including-- (A) a description of the manner in which RFE/RL, Incorporated, would meet the funding limitations provided in section 307(d)(2); (B) a statement that the authority to utilize existing transmitters has been obtained for the broadcasting of Radio Free Asia to countries or regions proposed in the plan, and that existing transmitters meet the technical needs of the new service; and (C) a detailed justification for the number of employees RFE/RL, Incorporated, proposes to hire, the extent to which RFE/RL, Incorporated, intends to utilize technical or other resources of other broadcasting entities, and the manner in which RFE/RL, Incorporated, intends to reimburse such other entities for such utilization of resources. (2) The plan required by paragraph (1) shall be submitted not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act. (3) No grant may be awarded to carry out the provisions of this section unless the plan submitted by the Board includes a certification by the Board that Radio Free Asia can be established and operated within the funding limitations provided for in section 307(d)(2). (4) The Comptroller General of the United States shall review the plan submitted by the Board and shall, not later than 30 days after receipt of the plan, report to the Director of the United States Information Agency, the Board, and the appropriate congressional committees on whether the Comptroller General determines that the fiscal assumptions contained in the plan are adequate and that the plan can be implemented within the funding limitations provided for in this section. (5) If the Board determines that a Radio Free Asia cannot be established or operated effectively within the funding limitations provided for in this section, the Board may submit, through the Director of United States Information Agency, an alternative plan and such proposed changes in legislation as may be necessary to the appropriate congressional committees. (d) Grant Agreement.--(1) Grants awarded under this section shall be subject to the same terms and conditions as are provided in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of section 309 with respect to the functions of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. (2) Any grant agreement under this section shall require that any contract entered into by RFE/RL, Incorporated, with respect to Radio Free Asia shall specify that all obligations are assumed by RFE/RL, Incorporated, and not by the United States Government, and shall further specify that funds to carry out the activities of RFE/RL, Incorporated, may not be available after September 30, 1999. (3) Any such grant agreement shall require that any lease agreements entered into by RFE/RL, Incorporated, with respect to Radio Free Asia shall be, to the maximum extent possible, assignable to the United States Government. (e) Limitations on Administrative and Managerial Costs.-- (1) It is the sense of the Congress that administrative and managerial costs for operation of Radio Free Asia should be kept to a minimum and, to the maximum extent feasible, should not exceed the costs that would have been incurred if Radio Free Asia had been operated as a Federal entity rather than as a grantee. (2) The Board shall include in the annual report required by section 304(a)(7) information on the amount of funds expended on administrative and managerial services by each of the broadcasting services operated through the Bureau, directly or by grant, and the steps it has taken to reduce unnecessary overhead costs for each of the broadcasting services. (f) Assessment of the Effectiveness of Radio Free Asia.-- Not later than 3 years after the date funds have been provided to RFE/RL, Incorporated, for the purpose of operating Radio Free Asia, the Board, through the Director of the United States Information Agency, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on-- (1) whether Radio Free Asia is technically sound and cost- effective, (2) whether Radio Free Asia consistently meets the standards for quality and objectivity established by law by the United States Information Agency or the Board, (3) whether Radio Free Asia is received by a sufficient audience to warrant its continuation, (4) the extent to which such broadcasting is already being received by the target audience from other credible sources; and (5) the extent to which the interest of the United States is being served by maintaining broadcasting of Radio Free Asia. (g) Sunset Provision.--The Board may not make any grant for the purpose of operating Radio Free Asia after September 30, 1998, unless the President of the United States determines in his fiscal year 1999 budget submission that continuation of funding for Radio Free Asia for 1 additional year is in the interest of the United States. (h) Notification and Consultation Regarding Displacement of Voice of America Broadcasting.--The Board shall notify the appropriate congressional committees before entering into any agreements for the utilization of Voice of America transmitters, equipment, or other resources that will significantly reduce the broadcasting activities of the Voice of America in Asia or any other region in order to accommodate the broadcasting activities of Radio Free Asia. The Chairman of the Board shall consult with such committees on the impact of any such reduction in Voice of America broadcasting activities. (i) Principal Place of Business.--Grants may only be made to RFE/RL, Incorporated, if the principal place of business of Radio Free Asia is within the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area, unless the Board determines that another location within the United States is necessary to carry out the functions of Radio Free Asia effectively and in a cost- effective manner. SEC. 309. RADIO FREE EUROPE AND RADIO LIBERTY. (a) Authority.--Grants authorized under section 307(a) shall be available to make annual grants for the purpose of carrying out the same functions as were carried out by RFE/ RL, Incorporated, before the date of enactment of this Act with respect to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, consistent with section 2 of the Board for International Broadcasting Act of 1973, as in effect on such date. (b) Grant Agreement.--(1) Such grants shall be made pursuant to a grant agreement between the Board and RFE/RL, Incorporated, which requires that grant funds shall only be used for activities which the Board determines are consistent with the purposes of subsection (a) and that RFE/RL, Incorporated, shall otherwise comply with the requirements of this section. Failure to comply with such requirements shall permit the grant to be terminated without fiscal obligation to the United States. (2) The grant agreement shall impose such conditions as the Board determines may be appropriate pursuant to section 304(a)(3) to reduce overlapping language services and broadcasting service with other broadcasting services operated within the International Broadcasting Bureau. (3) The grant agreement shall require RFE/RL, Incorporated, to justify in detail each proposed expenditure of grant funds, and such funds may not be used for any other purpose unless the Board gives its prior written approval. (c) Prohibited Uses of Grant Funds.--No grant funds provided under this section may be used-- (1) to pay any salary or other compensation, or enter into any contract providing for the payment thereof in excess of the rates established for comparable positions under title 5 of the United States Code or the foreign relations laws of the United States, except that no employee may be paid a salary or other compensation in an amount in excess of the rate of pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code and that the salary or other compensation limitations provided for in this paragraph shall not be imposed prior to January 1, 1995, with respect to any employee covered by a union agreement requiring a different salary or; (2) to pay for any activity for the purpose of influencing the passage or defeat of legislation being considered by Congress; (3) to enter into a contract or obligation to pay severance payments beyond those required by United States law or the laws of the country where the employee is stationed; (4) to pay for first class travel for any employee of RFE/ RL, Incorporated, or the employee's relative; or (5) to compensate freelance contractors without the written approval of the Director. (d) Report on Management Practices.--Not later than March 31 and September 30 of each calendar year, the Inspector General of the United States Information Agency shall submit to the Board, the Director of the United States Information Agency, and the Congress a report on management practices of RFE/RL, Incorporated, under this section during the preceding 6-month period. The Inspector General of the United States Information Agency shall establish a special unit within the Inspector General's office to monitor and audit the activities of RFE/RL, Incorporated, and shall provide for on- site monitoring of such activities. (e) Audit Authority.--(1) Such financial transactions of RFE/RL, Incorporated, as relate to functions carried out under this section may be audited by the General Accounting Office in accordance with such principles and procedures and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Comptroller General of the United States. Any such audit shall be conducted at the place or places where accounts of RFE/RL, Incorporated, are normally kept. (2) The representatives of the General Accounting Office shall have access to all books, accounts, records, reports, files, and all other papers, things or property belonging to or in use by the private entity pertaining to such financial transactions and necessary to facilitate the audit. Such representatives shall be afforded full facilities for verifying transactions with any assets held by depositories, fiscal agents, and custodians. All such books, accounts, records, reports files, papers, and property of RFE/RL, Incorporated, shall remain in the possession and custody of RFE/RL, Incorporated. (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Inspector General of the United States Information Agency is authorized to exercise the authorities of the Inspector General Act of 1978 with respect to RFE/RL, Incorporated. (g) Plan for Relocation.--Before relocating the activities of RFE/RL, Incorporated, in the Federal Republic of Germany to another site, the Board for International Broadcasting or the Board, if established, shall submit to the Comptroller General of the United States and the appropriate congressional committees a detailed plan for such relocation, including cost estimates. No funds made available under law may be used for such relocation unless explicitly provided in an appropriation Act or pursuant to a reprogramming notification. Any plan developed pursuant to this subsection shall include provisions for relocating the senior administrative and management personnel of RFE/RL, Incorporated, to the geographic area of Washington, D.C., as provided for in section 307(c). (h) Reports on Personnel Classification.--(1) Not later than 3 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board for International Broadcasting shall submit a report to the Office of Personnel Management containing a justification, in terms of the types of duties performed at specific rates of salary and other compensation, of the classification of personnel employed by RFE/RL, Incorporated. (2) Not later than 9 months after submission of the report referred to in paragraph (1), the Office of Personnel Management shall submit to Congress a report containing an evaluation of the system of personnel classification used by RFE/RL, Incorporated, with respect to its employees. (3) The report submitted by the Office of Personnel Management shall include a comparison of the rates of salary or other compensation and classifications provided to employees of RFE/RL, Incorporated, with the rates of salary or other compensation and classifications of employees of the Voice of America stationed overseas in comparable positions and shall identify any disparities and steps which should be taken to eliminate such disparities. SEC. 310. TRANSITION. (a) Authorization.--(1) The President is authorized to direct the transfer of all functions and authorities from the Board for International Broadcasting to the United States Information Agency, the Board, or the Bureau as may be necessary to implement this title. (2)(A) Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Chairman of the Board for International Broadcasting shall jointly prepare and submit to the President for approval and implementation a plan to implement the provisions of this title. Such report shall include at a minimum a detailed cost analysis to implement fully the recommendations of such plan. Additionally, such plan shall identify all costs in excess of those authorized for such purposes and shall provide that any excess cost to implement such plan shall be derived only from funds authorized in title II, Part A, section 201(a)(1) of this act. (B) The President shall transmit copies of the approved plan, together with any recommendations for legislative changes that may be necessary, to the appropriate congressional committees. (b) New Appointees.--The Director of the United States Information Agency may assign employees of the Agency for service with RFE/RL, Incorporated, with the concurrence of the president of RFE/RL, Incorporated. Such assignment shall not affect the rights and benefits of such personnel as employees of the United States Information Agency. (c) Board for International Broadcasting Personnel.--All Board for International Broadcasting full-time United States Government personnel (except special Government employees) and part-time United States Government personnel holding permanent positions shall be transferred to the United States Information Agency, the Board, or the Bureau. Such transfer shall not cause any such employee to be separated or reduced in grade or compensation. (d) Other Authorities.--The Director of the United States Information Agency is authorized to utilize the provisions of titles VIII and IX of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948, and any other authority available to the Director on the date of enactment of this Act, to the extent that the Director deems necessary in carrying out the provisions and purposes of this title. (e) Repeal.--The Board for International Broadcasting Act of 1973 (22 U.S.C. 2871, et seq.) is repealed effective September 30, 1995, or the earliest date by which all members of the Board are appointed, whichever is later. (f) Savings Provisions.-- (1) Continuing effect of legal documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, agreements, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, registrations, privileges, and other administrative actions-- (A) which have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, any Federal agency or official thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of functions which are transferred under this title; and (B) which are in effect at the time this title takes effect, or were final before the effective date of this title and are to become effective on or after the effective date of this title, shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Director of the United States Information Agency or other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law. (2) Proceedings not affected.--The provisions of this title shall not affect any proceedings pending before the Board for International Broadcasting at the time this title takes effect, with respect to functions transferred by this title, but such proceedings shall be continued. Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this title had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this title had not been enacted. (3) Suits not affected.--The provisions of this title shall not affect suits commenced before the effective date of this title, and in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this title had not been enacted. (4) Nonabatement of actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the Board for International Broadcasting or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of the Board for International Broadcasting shall abate by reason of the enactment of this title. (5) Administrative actions relating to promulgation of regulations.--Any administrative action relating to the preparation or promulgation of a regulation by the Board for International Broadcasting relating to a function transferred under this title may be continued by the United States Information Agency with the same effect as if this title had not been enacted. (6) References.--A reference in any provision of law, reorganization plan, or other authority to the Associate Director for Broadcasting of the United States Information Agency shall be considered to be a reference to the Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau of the United States Information Agency. (7) Effect on other laws.--The provisions of, and authorities contained in or transferred pursuant to, this title are not intended to repeal, limit, or otherwise derogate from the authorities or functions of or available to the Director of the United States Information Agency or the Secretary of State under law, reorganization plan, or otherwise, unless such provision hereof-- (A) specifically refers to the provision of law or authority existing on the effective date of this title, so affected; or (B) is in direct conflict with such law or authority existing on the effective date of this title. SEC. 311. PRESERVATION OF AMERICAN JOBS. It is the sense of the Congress that the Director of the United States Information Agency and the Chairman of the Board for International Broadcasting should, in developing the plan for consolidation and reorganization of overseas international broadcasting services, limit, to the maximum extent feasible, consistent with the purposes of the consolidation, elimination of any United States-based positions and should affirmatively seek to transfer as many positions as possible to the United States. SEC. 312. PRIVATIZATION OF RADIO FREE EUROPE AND RADIO LIBERTY. (a) Declaration of Policy.--It is the sense of the Congress that, in furtherance of the objectives of section 302 of this Act, the funding of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty should be assumed by the private sector not later than December 31, 1999, and that the funding of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty Research Institute should be assumed by the private sector at the earliest possible time. (b) Presidential Submission.--The President shall submit with his annual budget submission for the International Broadcasting Bureau established by section 306 of this Act an analysis and recommendations for achieving the objectives of subsection (a). (c) Reports on Transfer of RFE/RL Research Institute.--No later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board for International Broadcasting, or the Board, if established, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the steps being taken to transfer RFE/ RL Research Institute pursuant to subsection (a) and shall provide periodic progress reports on such efforts until such transfer has been achieved. SEC. 313. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this title-- (1) the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives; (2) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau, acting through the Office of Surrogate Broadcasting; (3) the term ``RFE/RL, Incorporated'' includes-- (A) the corporation having the corporate title described in section 307(b)(3); and (B) any alternative grantee described in section 307(e). (4) the term ``salary or other compensation'' includes any deferred compensation or pension payments, any payments for expenses for which the recipient is not obligated to itemize, and any payments for personnel services provided to an employee of RFE/RL, Incorporated. ____________________
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  (for himself and Mathews) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place in title II, part B, add the following: SECTION 1. REDUCTION IN FORCE AUTHORITY WITH REGARD TO THE FOREIGN SERVICE. (a) In General.--(1) Title VI of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.) is amended-- (A) by redesignating sections 611, 612, and 613 as sections 612, 613, and 614 respectively; and (B) by inserting after section 610 the following new section: ``Sec. 611. Reductions in Force.--(a) The Secretary may conduct reductions in force and may prescribe regulations for the separation of members of the Service under such reductions in force which give due effect to-- ``(1) organizational needs; ``(2) documented employee qualifications, knowledge, skills, or competencies; ``(3) documented employee performance; ``(4) tenure of employment; and ``(5) military preference. ``(b) For purposes of this section the term `members of the Service' means the individuals described under section 103.''. (2) The table of contents for the Foreign Service Act of 1980 is amended by striking out the items related to section 611, 612, 613 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Sec. 611. Reductions in force. ``Sec. 612. Termination of limited appointments. ``Sec. 613. Termination of appointments of consular agents and foreign national employees ``Sec. 614. Foreign Service awards.''. (b) Management Rights.--Section 1005(a) of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4105(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (6) as paragraphs (4) through (7), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) to conduct reductions in force, and to prescribe regulations for the separation of employees under such reductions in force conducted under section 611;''. (c) Consultation.--The Secretary of State shall consult with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management before prescribing regulations for reductions in force under section 611 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (as added by subsection (a) of this section). ____________________
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  proposed two amendments to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: Amendment No. 1248 On page 9, line 16, after ``purposes'' insert the following new subsection (b) and renumber the rest of the section accordingly: (b) Withholding of Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the funds authorized to be appropriated for ``Contributions for International Organizations'' shall be reduced in the amount of $118,875,000 for each fiscal years 1994 and 1995, and for each year thereafter, unless the President has certified to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the President of the Senate that no United Nations Agency or United Nations-affiliated agency grants any official status, accreditation, or recognition to any organization which promotes, condones, or seeks the legalization of pedophilia, or which includes as a subsidiary or member any such organization. Amendment No. 1249 On page 179, line 6, after the word ``agreement'' add the following: ``or a bilateral U.S. nuclear cooperation agreement.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  (for himself and Simon) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following new title: TITLE VIII--ARMS CONTROL AND NONPROLIFERATION ACT OF 1994 SEC. 801. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES IN ACT; TABLE OF CONTENTS. (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Arms Control and Nonproliferation Act of 1994''. (b) References in Title.--Except as specifically provided in this title, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to or repeal of a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to the Arms Control and Disarmament Act. SEC. 802. CONGRESSIONAL DECLARATIONS; PURPOSE. (a) Congressional Declarations.--The Congress declares that-- (1) a fundamental goal of the United States, particularly in the wake of the highly turbulent and uncertain international situation fostered by the end of the Cold War, the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the resulting emergence of fifteen new independent states, and the revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe, is to eliminate chemical and biological weapons and to reduce and limit the large numbers of nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union and, more generally, to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and of high- technology conventional armaments as well as to prevent regional conflicts and conventional arms races; and (2) an ultimate goal of the United States continues to be a world in which the use of force is subordinated to the rule of law and international change is achieved peacefully without the danger and burden of destabilizing and costly armaments. (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this title is-- (1) to strengthen the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; and (2) to improve congressional oversight of the arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. SEC. 803. PURPOSES. Section 2 (22 U.S.C. 2551) is amended in the text following the third undesignated paragraph by striking paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) and by inserting the following new paragraphs: ``(1) The preparation for and management of United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the arms control and disarmament field. ``(2) When directed by the President, the preparation for, and management of, United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the nonproliferation field. ``(3) The conduct, support, and coordination of research for arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament policy formulation. ``(4) The preparation for, operation of, or, as appropriate, direction of, United States participation in such control systems as may become part of United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities. ``(5) The dissemination and coordination of public information concerning arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament.''. SEC. 804. REPEALS. The following provisions of law are hereby repealed: (1) Section 26 (22 U.S.C. 2566), relating to the General Advisory Committee. (2) Section 36 (22 U.S.C. 2578), relating to arms control impact information and analysis. (3) Section 38 (22 U.S.C. 2578), relating to reports on Standing Consultative Commission activities. (4) Section 1002 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1986 (22 U.S.C. 2592a), relating to an annual report on Soviet compliance with arms control commitments. SEC. 805. DIRECTOR. Section 22 (22 U.S.C. 2562) is amended to read as follows: ``DIRECTOR ``Sec. 22. (a) Appointment.--The Agency shall be headed by a Director appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. No person serving on active duty as a commissioned officer of the Armed Forces of the United States may be appointed Director. ``(b) Duties.--(1) The Director shall serve as the principal adviser to the Secretary of State, the National Security Council, and the President and other executive branch Government officials on matters relating to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters. In carrying out his duties under this Act, the Director, under the direction of the President and the Secretary of State, shall have primary responsibility within the Government for matters relating to arms control and disarmament, and, whenever directed by the President, primary responsibility within the Government for matters relating to nonproliferation. ``(2) The Director shall attend all meetings of the National Security Council involving weapons procurement, arms sales, consideration of the defense budget, and all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters.''. SEC. 806. BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND DIVISIONS. Section 25 (22 U.S.C. 2565) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC. 25. BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND DIVISIONS. ``The Director, under the direction of the Secretary of State, may establish within the Agency such bureaus, offices, and divisions as he may determine to be necessary to discharge his responsibilities pursuant to this Act, including a bureau of intelligence and information support and an office to perform legal services for the Agency.''. SEC. 807. PRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVES. (a) Sections 27 and 28 (22 U.S.C. 2567, 2568) are redesignated as sections 26 and 27, respectively. (b) Section 26 (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended to read as follows: ``PRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL REPRESENTATIVES ``Sec. 26. The President may appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, Special Representatives of the President for Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament. Each Presidential Special Representative shall hold the personal rank of ambassador. Presidential Special Representatives appointed under this section shall perform their duties and exercise their powers under direction of the President and the Secretary of State, acting through the Director. The Agency shall be the Government agency responsible for providing administrative support, including funding, staff, and office space, to all Presidential Special Representatives.''. SEC. 808. POLICY FORMULATION. Section 33 (22 U.S.C. 2573) is amended to read as follows: ``POLICY FORMULATION ``Sec. 33. (a) Formulation.--The Director shall prepare for the President, the Secretary of State, and the heads of such other Government agencies as the President may determine, recommendations and advice concerning United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament policy. ``(b) Prohibition.--No action shall be taken pursuant to this or any other Act that would obligate the United States to reduce or limit the Armed Forces or armaments of the United States in a militarily significant manner, except pursuant to the treaty-making power of the President set forth in Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the Constitution or unless authorized by the enactment of further affirmative legislation by the Congress of the United States.''. SEC. 809. NEGOTIATION MANAGEMENT. Section 34 (22 U.S.C. 2574) is amended to read as follows: ``negotiation management ``Sec. 34. (a) Responsibilities.--The Director, under the direction of the President and the Secretary of State, shall have primary responsibility for the preparation, conduct, and management of United States participation in all international negotiations and implementation fora in the field of arms control and disarmament and shall have primary responsibility, whenever directed by the President, for the preparation, conduct, and management of United States participation in international negotiations and implementation fora in the field of nonproliferation. In furtherance of these responsibilities Special Representatives of the President for Nonproliferation, established pursuant to section 26, shall, as directed by the President, serve as the United States Government representatives to international organizations, conferences, and activities relating to the field of nonproliferation, such as the preparations for and conduct of the review relating to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. ``(b) Functions With Respect to the United States Information Agency.--The Director shall perform functions pursuant to section 2(c) of the Reorganization Plan 8 of 1953 with respect to providing to the United States Information Agency official United States positions and policy on arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament matters for dissemination abroad. ``(c) Authority.--The Director is authorized-- ``(1) to formulate plans and make preparations for the establishment, operation, and funding of inspections and control systems which may become part of the United States arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament activities; and ``(2) as authorized by law, to put into effect, direct, or otherwise assume United States responsibility for such systems.''. SEC. 810. REPORT ON MEASURES TO COORDINATE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. Not later than March 31, 1995, the President shall submit to the Congress a report prepared by the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, in coordination with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of Central Intelligence, with respect to the procedures established pursuant to section 35 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 U.S.C. 2575) for the effective coordination of research and development on arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament among all departments and agencies of the executive branch of Government. SEC. 811. NEGOTIATING RECORDS. (a) In General.--The Arms Control and Disarmament Act is amended by inserting after section 35 the following: ``NEGOTIATING RECORDS ``Sec. 36. (a) Preparation of Records.--The Director shall establish and maintain records for each arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreement to which the United States is a party and which was under negotiation or in force on or after January 1, 1990, which shall include classified and unclassified materials such as instructions and guidance, position papers, reporting cables and memoranda of conversation, working papers, draft texts of the agreement, diplomatic notes, notes verbal, and other internal and external correspondence. ``(b) Negotiating and Implementation Records.--In particular, the Director shall establish and maintain a negotiating and implementation record for each such agreement, which shall be comprehensive and detailed, and shall document all communications between the parties with respect to such agreement. Such records shall be maintained both in hard copy and magnetic media. ``(c) Participation of Agency Personnel.--In order to implement effectively this section, the Director shall ensure that Agency personnel participate throughout the negotiation and implementation phases of all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements.''. (b) Report Required.--Not later than January 31, 1995, the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a detailed report describing the actions he has undertaken to implement section 36 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act. SEC. 812. VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE. Section 37 (22 U.S.C. 2577) is amended to read as follows: ``VERIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE ``Sec. 37. (a) In General.--In order to ensure that arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements can be adequately verified, the Director shall report to Congress, on a timely basis, or upon request by an appropriate committee of the Congress-- ``(1) in the case of any arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreement that has been concluded by the United States, the determination of the Director as to the degree to which the components of such agreement can be verified; ``(2) in the case of any arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreement that has entered into force, any significant degradation or alteration in the capacity of the United States to verify compliance of the components of such agreement; and ``(3) the amount and percentage of research funds expended by the Agency for the purpose of analyzing issues relating to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament verification. ``(b) Standard for Verification of Compliance.--In making determinations under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a), the Director shall assume all measures of concealment not expressly prohibited could be employed and that standard practices could be altered so as to impede verification. ``(c) Rule of Construction.--Except as otherwise provided for by law, nothing in this section may be construed as requiring the disclosure of sensitive information relating to intelligence sources or methods or persons employed in the verification of compliance with arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements. ``(d) Participation of the Agency.--In order to ensure adherence of the United States to obligations or commitments undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements, and in order for the Director to make the assessment required by section 51(a)(5), the Director, or the Director's designee, shall participate in all interagency groups or organizations within the executive branch of Government that assess, analyze, or review United States planned or ongoing policies, programs, or actions that have a direct bearing on United States adherence to obligations undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreements.''. SEC. 813. AUTHORITIES WITH RESPECT TO NONPROLIFERATION MATTERS. (a) Amendments to the Arms Export Control Act.--(1) Section 38(a)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall be made in coordination with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, taking into account the Director's assessment as to whether the export of an article would contribute to an arms race, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other arrangements. The Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is authorized, whenever the Director determines that the issuance of an export license under this section would be detrimental to the national security of the United States, to recommend to the President that such export license be disapproved.''. (2) Section 42(a) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2791(a)) is amended-- (A) by redesignating clauses (1), (2), and (3) as clauses (A), (B), and (C), respectively; (B) by inserting ``(1)'' immediately after ``(a)''; (C) by amending clause (C) (as redesignated) to read as follows: ``(C) the assessment of the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency as to whether, and the extent to which, such sale might contribute to an arms race, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other arrangements;''; and (D) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Any proposed sale made pursuant to this Act shall be approved only after consultation with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is authorized, whenever the Director determines that a sale under this section would be detrimental to the national security of the United States, to recommend to the President that such sale be disapproved.''. (3) Section 71(a) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(a)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Defense''. (4) Section 71(b)(1) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(b)(1)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``Secretary of Defense''. (5) Section 71(b)(2) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(b)(2)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Commerce''. (6) Section 71(c) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(c)) is amended by inserting ``to include the Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``other appropriate Government agencies''. (7) Section 73(d) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2797(d)) is amended by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``The Secretary of Commerce''. (b) Amendment to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act.-- Section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 2139(a)) is amended in the second sentence by striking out ``, as required,''. SEC. 814. APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF PERSONNEL. Section 41(b) (22 U.S.C. 2581(b)) is amended by striking all that follows ``General Schedule pay rates,'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``except that-- ``(1) the Director may, to the extent the Director determines necessary, appoint in the excepted service, and fix the compensation of, employees possessing specialized technical expertise without regard to provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointment or compensation of employees of the United States, ``(2) an employee who is appointed under this provision may not be paid a salary in excess of the rate payable for positions of equivalent difficulty or responsibility, and in no event, may be paid at a rate exceeding the maximum rate in effect for level 15 of the General Schedule, and ``(3) the number of employees appointed under this paragraph shall not exceed ten percent of the number of positions allowed under the Agency's full-time equivalent limitation.''. SEC. 815. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS. Section 45(a) (22 U.S.C. 2585) is amended in the third sentence-- (1) by inserting ``or employed directly from other Government agencies'' after ``persons detailed from other Government agencies''; and (2) by striking ``by the Department of Defense or the Department of State'' and inserting ``by such agencies''. SEC. 816. ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS. (a) In General.--Title IV of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act is amended-- (1) by striking sections 49 and 50; (2) by redesignating sections 51 and 53 as sections 49 and 50, respectively; and (3) by inserting after section 50 (as redesignated by paragraph (2)) the following new sections: ``ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS ``Sec. 51. (a) In General.--Not later than January 31 of each year, the President shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report prepared by the Director, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Director of Central Intelligence, on the status of United States policy and actions with respect to arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament. Such report shall include-- ``(1) a detailed statement concerning the arms control and disarmament objectives of the executive branch of Government for the forthcoming year; ``(2) a detailed statement concerning the nonproliferation objectives of the executive branch of Government for the forthcoming year; ``(3) a detailed assessment of the status of any ongoing arms control or disarmament negotiations, including a comprehensive description of negotiations or other activities during the preceding year and an appraisal of the status and prospects for the forthcoming year; ``(4) a detailed assessment of the status of any ongoing nonproliferation negotiations or other activities, including a comprehensive description of the negotiations or other activities during the preceding year and an appraisal of the status and prospects for the forthcoming year; ``(5) a detailed assessment of adherence of the United States to obligations undertaken in arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements, including information on the policies and organization of each relevant agency or department of the United States to ensure adherence to such obligations, a description of national security programs with a direct bearing on questions of adherence to such obligations and of steps being taken to ensure adherence, and a compilation of any substantive questions raised during the preceding year and any corrective action taken; and ``(6) a detailed assessment of the adherence of other nations to obligations undertaken in all arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements to which the United States is a participating state, including information on actions taken by each nation with regard to the size, structure, and disposition of its military forces in order to comply with arms control, nonproliferation, or disarmament agreements, and shall include, in the case of each agreement about which compliance questions exist-- ``(A) a description of each significant issue raised and efforts made and contemplated with the other participating state to seek resolution of the difficulty; ``(B) an assessment of damage, if any, to the United States security and other interests; and ``(C) recommendations as to any steps that should be considered to redress any damage to United States national security and to reduce compliance problems. ``(b) Classification of the Report.--The report required by this section shall be submitted in unclassified form, with classified annexes, as appropriate. ``AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS ``Sec. 52. (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out the purposes of this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated-- ``(1) $57,500,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $59,375,000 for fiscal year 1995; and ``(2) such additional amounts as may be necessary for each fiscal year for which an authorization of appropriations is provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection for increases in salary, pay, retirement, other employee benefits authorized by law, and other nondiscretionary costs, and to offset adverse fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. ``(b) Transfer of Funds.--Funds appropriated pursuant to this section may be allocated or transferred to any agency for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Such funds shall be available for obligation and expenditure in accordance with the authorities of this Act or in accordance with the authorities governing the activities of the agencies to which such funds are allocated or transferred. ``(c) Limitation.--Not more than 12 percent of any appropriation made pursuant to this Act shall be obligated or reserved during the last month of the fiscal year.''. (b) Effective Date.--So much of the amendment made by subsection (a) as inserts section 52 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act shall be deemed to have become effective as of October 1, 1993. SEC. 817. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS. (a) Section 2 (22 U.S.C. 2551) is amended-- (1) in the second undesignated paragraph, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``Arms control''; and (2) in the second and third undesignated paragraphs, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control'' each place it appears. (b) Section 28 (22 U.S.C. 2568) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``field of arms control and disarmament'' and inserting ``fields of arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament''; and (2) in the second sentence, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control''. (c) Section 31 (22 U.S.C. 2571) is amended-- (1) in the text above paragraph (a), by striking ``field of arms control and disarmament'' each of the three places it appears and inserting ``fields of arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament''; (2) in the first sentence, by inserting ``and nonproliferation'' after disarmament; and (3) in the fourth sentence, by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after arms control each of the eight places it appears. (d) Section 35 (22 U.S.C. 2575) is amended by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control''. (e) Section 39 (22 U.S.C. 2579) is amended by inserting ``, nonproliferation,'' after ``arms control'' each of the two places it appears. At the bottom of page 5, add the following: TITLE VIII--ARMS CONTROL AND NONPROLIFERATION ACT OF 1994 Sec. 801. Short title; references in title; table of contents. Sec. 802. Congressional declarations; purpose. Sec. 803. Purposes. Sec. 804. Repeals. Sec. 805. Director. Sec. 806. Bureaus, offices, and divisions. Sec. 807. Presidential special representatives. Sec. 808. Policy formulation. Sec. 809. Negotiation management. Sec. 810. Report on measures to coordinate research and development. Sec. 811. Negotiating records. Sec. 812. Verification of compliance. Sec. 813. Authorities with respect to nonproliferation matters. Sec. 814. Appointment and compensation of personnel. Sec. 815. Security requirements. Sec. 816. Annual report to Congress; authorization of appropriations. Sec. 817. Conforming amendments. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Glenn) proposed two amendments to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: Amendment No. 1251 On pages 2 and 3 strike out the items relating to sections 136 through 140 and insert in lieu thereof the following: Sec. 136. Refugee affairs. Sec. 137. Office of foreign missions. Sec. 138. Women's human rights protection. Sec. 139. Repeals. On page 41, beginning on line 5, strike out all through line 3 on page 42. On page 42, line 4, strike out ``SEC. 137.'' insert in lieu thereof ``Sec. 136.''. On page 43, line 22, strike out ``SEC. 138.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 137.''. On page 46, line 7, strike out ``SEC. 139.'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 138.''. On page 46, line 20, strike out ``SEC. 140.00'' insert in lieu thereof ``SEC. 139.''. Amendment No. 1252 At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: Sense of the Senate.--It is the Sense of the Senate that-- (a) There is a growing concern among some of the Members of this body that the unlimited terms of Office of Inspectors General in federal agencies may be undesirable, therefore, (b) The issue of amending the Inspector General Act to establish term limits for Inspectors General should be examined and considered as soon as possible by the appropriate committees of jurisidction. ____________________
 
The speaker is JOHNSTON and he says  President, I would like to announce for the public that a hearing has been scheduled before the full Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. The hearing will take place Tuesday, February 1, 1994, at 9:30 a.m. in room 366 of the Senate Dirksen Office Building in Washington, DC. The purpose of the hearing is to receive testimony from Charles Curtis, nominee to be Under Secretary of Energy, and Robert Uram, nominee to be Director, Office of Surface Mining for the Department of the Interior. For further information, please contact Rebecca Murphy at (202) 224- 7562. committee on energy and natural resources
 
The speaker is JOHNSTON and he says  President, I would like to announce for the public that a hearing has been scheduled before the full Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. The hearing will take place Tuesday, February 8, 1994, at 9:30 a.m. in room 366 of the Senate Dirksen Office Building in Washington, DC. The purpose of the hearing is to receive testimony from Greta Joy Dicas, Margaret Hornbeck Greene, William J. Rainer, Kneeland C. Young, and Frank G. Zarb, nominees to be members of the Board of Directors of the United States Enrichment Corporation. For further information, please contact Rebecca Murphy at (202) 224- 7562. committee on veterans' affairs
 
The speaker is JOHNSTON and he says  The Committee on Veterans' Affairs would like to announce that a hearing on the nomination of R. John Vogel to be Under Secretary for Benefits at the Department of Veterans Affairs will be held in room 418 of the Russell Senate Office Building at 10:00 a.m. on Wednesday, January 26, 1994. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent on behalf of the Governmental Affairs Committee for authority to meet on Tuesday, January 25, at 9:45 a.m., for a hearing on the subject: human radiation and other scientific experiments: The Federal Government's role.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. select committee on Intelligence
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the Selection Committee on Intelligence be authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Tuesday, January 25, 1994 at 2:30 p.m. to hold an open hearing on intelligence matters.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  President, 30 years ago, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 became law. Most of us in this body remember the events that led to the passage of that landmark legislation, and some of us may remember the debate that preceded its passage. But there was a very specific part of that debate that has special significance today. On February 8, 1964, former Congresswoman Martha Griffiths, of Michigan, gave an eloquent speech on the floor of the House of Representatives, urging her colleagues to add gender to the Civil Rights Act. She pointed out that the act would right some of the wrongs based on race, but she vehemently argued that wrongs based on gender were not addressed. Consequently, protection for women was included in the act. Martha Griffiths never abandoned her mission to promote the equality of women in our society, and later she successfully led the campaign for the equal rights amendment in the House. After completing 20 productive and notable years in Washington, Martha Griffiths retired from Congress and a few years later started a new career as Lieutenant Governor of Michigan, where she served 8 years. And just recently, she was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, NY, only the 82nd woman to achieve this honor. On February 6, the American Association of University Women, along with the Michigan Women's Commission and the Michigan Women's Historical Center/Michigan Women's Hall of Fame, is honoring Martha Griffiths and celebrating the 30th anniversary of her landmark speech in Congress. I want to add my congratulations to her, and her husband Hicks Griffiths, and wish them both many more years of good health and much happiness. ____________________
 
The speaker is DODD and he says  President, on December 24 a very special member of the Connecticut community, Luisa DeLauro of New Haven, celebrated her 80th birthday. Luisa DeLauro has served her neighbors on New Haven's Board of Aldermen for 27 years, the longest tenure in the board's two century history. Through four decades and five different mayors--soon to be six, Luisa has been a tireless advocate for the people in her Wooster Square ward, the heart of the large Italian-American community in the New Haven area. She has fought consistently for more jobs and better housing, clean parks, and sidewalks, and lower taxes. After 14 terms as an alderwoman, her neighbors lovingly refer to her as ``The Mayor of Wooster Square,'' although most of them view her more as a friend than as a political representative. As a young woman, Luisa worked in the heat and din of a New Haven dress factory, struggling with other Italian immigrants to secure a better life for herself and her daughter in a land of opportunity. At night and on weekends, she worked in a bakery to supplement her meager income. Somehow, Luisa found the time to enter politics. In 1933, she wrote in the newsletter of the 10th Ward Democratic Club, We are not living in the Middle Ages when a woman's part in life was merely to serve her master in the home, but we have gradually taken our place in every phase of human endeavor, and even in the heretofore stronghold of the male sex: politics. As an alderwoman, Luisa has garnered praise for her tremendous energy, her unswerving loyalty to Wooster Square, and her Italian pastries, which she distributes at board meetings and on election day. She has also been a consistent champion of seniors and minority communities in her own ward and throughout the city. But she will always be remembered, together with her late husband Ted, for preserving the architectural beauty of downtown New Haven. In the 1940's, the couple fought hard against a plan to demolish many of the old buildings in Wooster Square and central New Haven and redevelop the area. Thanks to their efforts, the classic structures--many of which were over a century old even then--were renovated instead of destroyed. Today, Wooster Square is the most beautiful part of New Haven. Luisa DeLauro's life symbolizes what is best about America: family and hard work and public service. And she is showing no signs of slowing down. On her 80th birthday, I salute her. ____________________
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  President, on October 13, 1843, a small group of immigrants in New York City founded B'nai B'rith, the first international service organization founded in the United States. At that time, a few people of the Jewish faith dreamed of uniting Jews in work that would promote not only their interests, but the interests of all humankind. Today, a half million members and affiliates in 52 countries carry on this dream. In October of 1843, 12 members contributed $60 each to a fund for widows and orphans. This year, B'nai B'rith will spend more than $25 million on education, social service, youth activities, and many other community programs and activities. B'nai B'rith fought anti-Semitism as early as 1851 when it persuaded the U.S. Senate, which was considering a pending treaty with Switzerland, to insist on the removal of anti-Jewish restrictions in several Swiss cantons. In 1913 it formally established the Anti- Defamation League to coordinate the fight against anti-Semitism. Today, ADL is one of the world's foremost advocates of human rights, fighting for Jews and non-Jews alike. B'nai B'rith organized the National Jewish Hospital in Denver, a non- sectarian, non-fee hospital which was a pioneer institution for treatment and research in tuberculosis. During the Civil War, members of a B'nai B'rith lodge in Chicago recruited and equipped a company of Jewish soldiers in response to President Lincoln's call for volunteers. Thirteen years before the founding of the American Red Cross, B'nai B'rith organized the first disaster relief campaign in the United States for victims of a Baltimore flood. This kind of work continues to this day. B'nai B'rith challenged the forced evacuation of Japanese-Americans from the west coast during World War II. At the same time, it sold millions of dollars worth of U.S. war bonds, contributed recreational facilities at military camps and hospitals, entertained service personnel and distributed game books and magazines. It was the first civilian organization to receive citations from the Army and the Navy. This is just a short summary of achievement of this fine organization. B'nai B'rith continues to step up to the challenges of guiding our youth, helping our seniors and serving our country. I am proud to bring the achievements of B'nai B'rith to the attention of my colleagues and I wish its leaders and members another 150 productive years--and more. ____________________
 
The speaker is DeCONCINI and he says  Since 1983, the U.S. Congress and the German parliament, the Bundestag, have conducted an annual exchange program in which staff members from both countries observe and learn about the workings of each other's political institutions and convey the views of members from both sides on issues of mutual concern. This exchange program has been one of several sponsored by both public and private institutions in the United States and Germany to foster better understanding of the institutions and policies of both countries. This year will mark the fourth exchange with a reunified Germany and a parliament consisting of members from both the West and the East. Ten staff members from the U.S. Congress will be chosen to visit Germany from April 23 to May 7. They will spend most of the time attending meetings conducted by members of the Bundestag, Bundestag party staffers, and representatives of political, business, academic, and media institutions. They also will spend a weekend in the district of a Bundestag member. A comparable delegation of German staff members will come to the United States in late June for a 3-week period. They will attend similar meetings here in Washington and will visit the districts of Members of Congress over the Fourth of July recess. The Congress-Bundestag exchange is highly regarded in Germany. Accordingly, U.S. participants should be experienced and accomplished Hill staffers so that they can contribute to the success of the exchange on both sides of the Atlantic. The Bundestag sends senior staffers to the United States and a number of high-ranking members of the Bundestag take time to meet with the U.S. delegation. The United States endeavors to reciprocate. Applicants should have a demonstrable interest in events in Europe. Applicants need not be working in the field of foreign affairs, although such a background can be helpful. The composite United States delegation should exhibit a range of expertise in issues of mutual concern in Germany and the United States, such as, but not limited to, trade, security, the environment, immigration, economic development, health care, and other social policy issues. In addition, U.S. participants are expected to help plan and implement the program for the Bundestag staffers when they visit the United States. Among the contributions participants should expect to make is the planning of topical meetings in Washington. Moreover, participants are expected to host one or two staff people in their Member's district over the Fourth of July, or to arrange for such a visit to another Member's district. Participants will be selected by a committee composed of U.S. Information Agency personnel and past participants of the exchange. Senators and Representatives who would like a member of their staff to apply for participation in this year's program should direct them to submit a resume and cover letter only in which they state why they believe they are qualified, and some assurances of their ability to participate during the time stated. Applications may be sent to Bob Maynes or Ginger Harper, Office of Senator Dennis DeConcini, 328 Hart Building, by Tuesday, February 15. ____________________
 
The speaker is MOYNIHAN and he says  President, I wish the Record to reflect that, had there been a vote on the Brady bill, I would have voted in favor of it.
 
The speaker is FEINGOLD and he says  President, if a rollcall vote would have been called for on the conference report of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, my vote would have been ``year.''
 
The speaker is HARKIN and he says  President, I wish to inform the Senate that had there been a recorded vote on final passage of the Brady bill, I would have voted in the affirmative.
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  President, if there had been a recorded vote on the conference report on the Brady bill I would have voted in the affirmative.
 
The speaker is ROBB and he says  President, as a supporter of the Brady bill, I wish to note for the Record that if there had been a recorded vote on passage, I would have voted ``aye.'' I think it is important to illustrate the broad range of support for this bill.
 
The speaker is SHELBY and he says  President, had there been a recorded vote on passage of the Brady bill, H.R. 1025, I would have voted ``nay.''
 
The speaker is WELLSTONE and he says  President, on November 24 the Senate passed the Brady bill conference report. Had there been a recorded vote I would have voted ``yea.'' MOSELEY-BRAUN. President, I wish to announce, for the Congressional Record, that, had there been a rollcall vote on the ``Brady'' bill, I would have voted in favor of the bill.
 
The speaker is KENNEDY and he says  President, I wish the Record to reflect had the conference report on the Brady bill (H.R. 1025), been subject to a rollcall vote, I would have voted ``aye'' on passage of this conference report.
 
The speaker is LIEBERMAN and he says  President, as a cosponsor of the Brady bill, I wish to note for the Record that, had there been a recorded vote on passage, I would have voted in favor of the Brady bill.
 
The speaker is LAUTENBERG and he says  President, I wish to note for the Record that, if there had been a rollcall vote on adoption of the Brady bill conference report, I would have voted ``yea.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  President, when he served as Governor of Puerto Rico, I had the opportunity to get acquainted with Carlos Romero- Barcelo. Now he is the Resident Commissioner in Congress, better known as a nonvoting Member of Congress from Puerto Rico. He continues to be loaded with good sense and good leadership skills. Recently he had an article in Roll Call commenting on the Puerto Rican plebiscite and what we ought to do. In his article, he mentions a bill introduced by Congressman Don Young, which I have not had a chance to look at yet. But, we ought to be listening to Carlos Romero-Barcelo, as well as the able, new Governor of Puerto Rico, Pedro Rossello. I ask that Carlos Romero-Barcelo's article from Roll Call be placed in the Record at this point, and I urge my colleagues who have not read it to do so. [From Roll Call, Jan. 6, 1994] Congress Can Help End Puerto Rico's Status Stalemate (By Carlos Romero-Barelo) For the first time in 26 years, the US citizens of Puerto Rico have voted in a political status plebiscite to express a preference for commonwealth, statehood, or independence. In a vote that surprised many, none of the three options emerged from the Nov. 14 plebiscite with a majority. ``Commonwealth'' garnered 48.6 percent, ``statehood'' 43.6 percent, and ``independence'' 4.4 percent. The plebiscite was held to fulfill a 1992 campaign promise made by those of us in the pro-statehood New Progressive Party who wanted to offer the people of Puerto Rico a way out of our colonial status: a colonial relationship in which 3.6 million US citizens do not have the right to vote in a presidential election and are denied voting representation in Congress as well as full benefits in some of the most important federal programs. Commonwealth supporters campaigned on the theme that Puerto Rico's residents currently enjoy ``the best of both worlds.'' With this spin, they sought to remind voters that they do not pay federal income taxes and in many cases are employed by corporations that until this year were exempt from federal corporate taxation. As Puerto Rico's sole representative in Congress, every day when I walk into the House chamber I live the frustration of disenfranchisement. The stalemate produced by the lack of majority support for any one particular status option seems to have heightened the interest of a number of Members in finding out just what happened. Many have asked me what can be done in order to help Puerto Rico make a final decision on its political status and to end the present colonial relationship. With commonwealth's plurality margin and the fact that statehood was a very close second, it's clear that no one is being fooled into thinking that commonwealth won another mandate. While in most jurisdictions of the US general elections can be won by a plurality of votes, when it comes to effecting a change of status, everyone understands that winning by a majority is essential. For the first time since the Commonwealth's inception in 1952, the people of Puerto Rico are subject to the sovereignty of Congress without the expressed consent of the majority of Puerto Ricans. For both the people of Puerto Rico and the United States, which exercises sovereignty over Puerto Rico, such a situation is untenable. As sovereign, the United States has an obligation to make sure that Puerto Rico achieves a political status that has the consent of the majority. There's more than one way to resolve the current stalemate. Perhaps the best way to begin would be making a careful examination of the definition of commonwealth that was presented on the plebiscite ballot. The Constitution and history indicate that such a commonwealth is neither compatible with the US constitutional system nor financially viable. And if that is indeed the case, Congress has an obligation to speak out clearly so that a future plebiscite will not be vitiated, as the latest one was, by false and impossible promises by commonwealth leaders. In the coming months, Congress will have an opportunity to review the plebiscite's results, beginning with an upcoming hearing by the House Natural Resources insular and international affairs subcommittee to examine the viability of implementing the status called for in the commonwealth definition. But there is another effort that is also aimed at breaking the status gridlock: a bill offered by Rep. Don Young (R- Alaska) that provides a mechanism for the unincorporated territories of the United States to achieve incorporation. As the ranking member of the Natural Resources panel, Young has set forth a plan that formalizes a serious intention to assure the US puts an end to colonial relationships with the remaining territories (Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands) before the United Nations ``Decade of Decolonization'' comes to an end. The Young bill addresses the 95 percent of the Puerto Rican electorate that supports the achievement of three major goals for Puerto Rico: irrevocable, permanent union with the US, irrevocable and guaranteed US citizenship; and equal treatment with the states in all federal programs. But the achievement of each of these guarantees has a price: the payment of federal income taxes. Statehood advocates, like myself, sought to explain during the plebiscite campaign that the responsibility to pay federal income taxes will be a benefit, and not a burden, for many low-income residents of Puerto Rico. This is because many of our taxpayers would qualify for the Earned Income credit for low-income wage earners. Given the filing in the House of the Young bill, along with the initiation of a Congressional examination of Commonwealth status, we anticipate that the stalemate will not continue indefinitely. I am convinced that once the people of Puerto Rico clearly understand the options, they will vote decisively for equality, that is, to be come the 51st state. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  President, I got on a United Airlines plane recently, and when I finished doing the work I brought along, I reached for the publication of the airline. In it was a statement by Stephen M. Wolf, the United Airlines chief executive officer. It was not about airlines or transportation but about the problem of crime, and what we're doing in our country. Instead of the usual nonsense, Steve Wolf has a statement that really makes sense; urging us to take the long, hard, difficult road to solving crime that means paying attention to people from the earliest years on. I ask to insert Steve Wolf's message into the Record at this point. The article follows: [From Hemispheres, January 1994] Harvest of Tears (By Stephen M. Wolf) Even in the land of freedom, there are communities virtually taken hostage by murders, thieves, and drug traffickers. The evening news could not paint a more lurid picture of a nation where many citizens are afraid to leave their homes and where youths use guns to establish authority. Is spending more money to build prisons and increase the police ranks the answer? Yes, but only partly. These approaches focus solely on crime after the fact--after the crime is committed and after innocent victims have suffered. I believe we will never reduce crime unless we direct more money and energy toward early intervention, rehabilitation, and drug programs. I certainly support the views that dangerous criminals should be incarcerated and kept off the street for a long time and punishment for violent offenders must be harsh enough to send a strong message. But the nation's preoccupation with the quick fix of building more prisons and mandatory minimum sentences for drug offenders has put more people in jail, but not much else. According to USA Today, between 1981 and 1991, the U.S. prison population more than doubled, while violent crime rose more than 40 percent. America, in fact, has the most people in jail per capita in the world. Obviously, our current system is failing to deter crime and make our streets safe again. We must find long-term answers. In the short term, we can build more prisons, but to make real inroads in reducing crime rates, we must assist at-risk children and young, first-time offenders before criminal behavior becomes a way of life. A Colorado judge recently addressed this issue in his sentence of a juvenile offender. ``I hope that these days when the juvenile justice system is under the microscope, there will be recognition that crime prevention begins at home,'' he said, ``and that if we do not spend money helping parents and families, all the prisons in the world won't solve the juvenile crime problem.'' We are losing our children, as they commit serious crimes at ever younger ages. U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno also advocates early intervention, believing the first three years are crucial. ``We will never have enough dollars to save everybody if we wait until they are 16 or 17,'' she said. Elected to five terms as state attorney for Dade County, Florida, Reno believes children must have support and a nurturing environment--ideally from their families--and has put her theories into action. She opened Florida's first domestic violence unit. She started a center to help with child abuse cases. She brought teachers, police, and health officials together to help families in one of the city's poorest public housing developments. And she helped create a Drug Court that emphasizes treatment instead of jail for young first offenders. Because of her emphasis on children and crime prevention programs, some have accused Reno of being ``soft'' on crime. On the contrary, taking a long-term view of the problem is not a sign of being soft on crime, but demonstrates the wisdom in realizing that simply punishing those who commit crimes has not provided an effective deterrent. We cannot continue to let crime grow unchecked. Unless we attack it at its roots, many of our children will be tangled in its branches and the only harvest our communities will reap will be one of tears. ____________________
 
The speaker is BRYAN and he says  President, it is required by paragraph 4 of rule 35 that I place in the Congressional Record notices of Senate employees who participate in programs, the principal objective of which is educational, sponsored by a foreign government or a foreign educational or charitable organization involving travel to a foreign country paid for by that foreign government or organization. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Suzanne C. Hildick, a member of the staff of Senator Hatfield, to participate in a program in Germany, sponsored by the Center for Civic Education of the United States and the Federal Center for Political Education of the Federal Republic of Germany, from October 2-9, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Hildick in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Bruce Cordingly, a member of the staff of Senator Gorton, to participate in a program in Hong Kong and China, sponsored by the Hong Kong Chamber of Commerce, from August 30-September 6, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Cordingly in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Angela Flood, a member of the staff of Senator Coats, to participate in a program in Germany, sponsored by the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, from September 4-10, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Flood in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Ken Levinson, a member of the staff of Senator Rockefeller, to participate in a program in Germany, sponsored by the Friedrich Naumann Foundation, from September 4-10, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Levinson in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for John Person, a member of the staff of Senator Sasser, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by the Chung Yuan Christian University, from August 22-29, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Person in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Kevin Dempsey, a member of the staff of Senator Danforth, to participate in a program in Hong Kong, sponsored by the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, from August 30-September 6, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Dempsey in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Christopher Hull, a member of the staff of Senator Burns, to participate in a program in Korea, sponsored by the Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs, from August 28-September 6, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Hull in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Senator Coverdell, to participate in a program in Hong Kong, Taiwan and South China, sponsored by Vision 2047 Foundation of Hong Kong, a private foreign organization, and the Atlantic Council of the United States, a domestic organization from August 18-25, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Senator Coverdell in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Marc E. Nicholson, a member of the staff of Senator Jeffords, to participate in a program in Korea, sponsored by the Korea Institute for International Economic Policy, from October 16-24, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Nicholson in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Sean O'Neal, a member of the staff of Senator Campbell, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by Soochow University, from December 8-14, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by O'Neal in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Pamela Sellars, a member of the staff of Senator Coats, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by the Chung Yuan Christian University, from December 12-19, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Sellars in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Kathleen Casey, a member of the staff of Senator Shelby, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by Chung Yuan Christian University, from December 12-19, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Casey in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Claudia Davant, a member of the staff of Senator Thurmond, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by Soochow University, from December 8-14, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Davant in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Edward M. Bolen, a member of the staff of Senator Kassebaum, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs from December 6-17, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Bolen in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Gary Reese, a member of the staff of Senator DeConcini, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs from December 6-17, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Reese in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Steven B. Harris, a member of the staff of Senator Riegle, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, from December 6-17, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Harris in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Gene Wiley, a member of the staff of Senator Pressler, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, from December 6-17, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Wiley in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Susanne Martinez, a member of the staff of Senator Feingold, to participate in a program in Singapore, sponsored by the U.S.-Asia Institute, from November 28-December 3, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Martinez in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Patricia McDonald, a member of the staff of Senator Wallop, to participate in a program in the Federal Republic of Germany, sponsored by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, from November 27-December 4, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by McDonald in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Chris McLean, a member of the staff of Senator Exon, to participate in a program in Singapore, sponsored by the Republic of Singapore, from November 28-December 3, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by McLean in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Laura Hudson, a member of the staff of Senator Johnston, to participate in a program in Singapore, sponsored by the Republic of Singapore, from November 28-December 3, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Hudson in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Sam Spina, a member of the staff of Senator Gorton, to participate in a program in Singapore, sponsored by the Republic of Singapore, from November 28-December 3, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Spina in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Kris Kolesnik, a member of the staff of Senator Grassley, to participate in a program in Germany, sponsored by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, from November 27-December 4, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Kolesnik in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Patricia McDonald, a member of the staff of Senator Wallop, to participate in a program in the Federal Republic of Germany, sponsored by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, from November 27-December 4, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by McDonald in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for a member of the staff of Senator Roth to participate in a program in Taiwan sponsored by the Chinese Culture University from January 4-10, 1994. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Senate staff in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Erik Smulson, a member of the staff of Senator Jeffords, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by the Chinese Culture University from January 4-10, 1994. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Smulson in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Senator and Akaka to participate in a program in China, from January 7-13, 1994, sponsored by the Chinese Peoples Institute for Foreign Affairs, an agency of the Chinese Government. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Senator and Akaka in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Brian P. Moran, a member of the staff of Senator Bumpers, to participate in a program in Taiwan, sponsored by Soochow University, from January 8-15, 1994. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Moran in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Senator and Bradley to participate in a program in Hamburg, Germany, sponsored by the Korber Foundation, from May 21-23, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Senator and Bradley in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Tom McMahon, a member of the staff of Senator Heflin, to participate in a program in Saudi Arabia, Syria, and the United Arab Emirates sponsored by the Abu Dhabi Chamber of Commerce and the Saudi Chamber of Commerce and Industry from November 25-December 5, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by McMahon in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Martin J. Gruenberg, a member of the staff of Senator Riegle, to participate in a program in Germany and Belgium, sponsored by the European Community Commission, from December 4-14, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Gruenberg in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Stewart Hall, a member of the staff of Senator Shelby, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese People's Institute of Foreign Affairs, from December 4-19, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Hall in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Thomas H. Moore, a member of the staff of Senator Breaux, to participate in a program in the Republic of Singapore, sponsored by the Republic of Singapore, from November 24-December 6, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Moore in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Edward L. King, a member of the staff of Senator Mitchell, to participate in a program in Hong Kong and South China, sponsored by the Atlantic Council and Vision 2047 Foundation from December 11-20, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by King in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Daniel Sherman, a member of the staff of Senator Boren, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by Chung Yuan Christian University, from December 12-19, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Sherman in this program. The select committee received notification under rule 35 for Robert S. Foust, a member of the staff of Senator Conrad, to participate in a program in China, sponsored by the Chinese Culture University, from January 4-10, 1993. The committee determined that no Federal statute or Senate rule would prohibit participation by Foust in this program. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  President, just before we quit for 1993 in our formal congressional sessions, the New York Times published an article by Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent political prisoner, who was recently released after 14 years in prison. He warns us not to be fooled and not to be talked too easily into making concessions to China. My instinct is, that is precisely what is happening. We are selling the new, sophisticated computer to China, and I can see nothing concrete that we are getting in return. Not only is China one of the worst abusers of human rights in the world today, if you look down the road 30 years from now, and ask what nation may be a significant military threat to its neighbors, one of those has to be China. I hope before we get to that period when a dictatorial China represents a threat, democracy can take hold, and China will live in peace with its neighbors. But I believe it is unsound policy to assume that will happen. I ask to insert the Wei Jingsheng article in the Congressional Record at this point. The article follows: The Wolf and the Lamb (By Wei Jingsheng) Beijing.--Most Americans don't really understand China, just as most Chinese don't understand America. This leads the two Governments to make numerous miscalculations in their relations and leads the two peoples toward numerous misunderstandings of the opposing regime's conduct. For example, the Chinese Government holds that America cares nothing for the fate or future of the Chinese people; this means that raising human rights issues becomes nothing but a political tactic used in laying siege to the Communist Party or merely an economic bargaining tool. So China treats human rights as a problem of foreign relations. And the primary pretext for refusing to bend under international pressure on human rights is that China ``will not allow interference in its internal affairs.'' Furthermore, there is a tendency on the part of China to view the detention and release of dissidents as a hostage transaction, in which freedom for the prisoner is just a bargaining chip in an economic poker game. The reason the Chinese Government is willing to make such unclean transactions is that it does not understand why the U.S. might be unwilling to continue lucrative trade relations if China's human rights environment does not improve. China doesn't understand, because it thinks this way: Is it really likely that Americans would befriend a people they are not at all familiar with? Is it really likely that Americans would abandon an opportunity to make money just to protect the human rights of those they have befriended? Is it really likely that the American people's determinations of right and wrong could ever influence the judgment of the U.S. Government? It looks as if the Communist Party has answered these questions in the negative. So even though it may have realized that its own conduct might have been in error, it still firmly pursues a strategy of brinkmanship, giving ground only when absolutely necessary and always in the last five minutes of negotiations. For example, Chinese officials last week agreed to give ``positive consideration'' to allowing the International Committee of the Red Cross to inspect prisons. The party holds that in such ways it will save face, and in the end will debunk Yankee protestations of seriousness over human rights, which the party believes are just an affectation. Pursuing this strategy, Beijing believes, will free it to deprive the people of their freedom. It also seems that the U.S. Government has misunderstand the true mind-set of the Chinese Government. Washington evidently believes that the Communist Party resembles a bunch of slow-witted rulers of a backward culture and that China doesn't comprehend that violations of human rights are evil. Therefore, the Clinton Administration now plans to abandon policies of pressure in favor of a policy of persuasion and ``enhanced engagement''--a misguided shift to be symbolized in Seattle today by the handshake between Presidents Clinton and Jiang Zemin. Unfortunately, the reality is more like the Aesop's fable in which a lamb tries to reason with a wolf. After the wolf accuses the lamb of fouling his drinking water, the lamb protests: ``I could not have fouled your water because I live downstream from you.'' The wolf eats the lamb anyway. I fear that no matter how much the two contries debate, the old wolf in China will still complain about its drinking water. China not only doesn't understand reason but also does not intend to reason. I'm unclear about the American people's understanding of changes in China-U.S. relations, but the Chinese people's understanding of their own Government is very precise. The present leaders were the most outspoken group of men, shouting their support of human rights and democracy before they ascended to power. But their subsequent dictatorship made clear that they have no intention of making good on the promises they once made to the masses. The Chinese people's understanding of the new direction of U.S. policy toward China leads them to believe that the party was right all these years in saying that the American Government is controlled by rich capitalists. All you have to do is offer them a chance to make money and anything goes. Their consciences never stopped them from making money. I don't really believe in this kind of understanding--or rather I'm not willing to believe in it. ____________________
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, I rise today to pay tribute to an extraordinary New Yorker, Lt. Adam S. Levitt. Lieutenant Levitt has the distinct honor of receiving a sea-going command while still a lieutenant when the fourth of thirteen Cyclone-class ships, the U.S.S. Monsoon, is christened this month. This is quite an honor and a great opportunity for early and major responsibility. Lt. Adam S. Levitt, a native of Malverne, NY, graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1984 with a bachelor of science degree in operations analysis. Upon commissioning he reported to U.S.S. John Young as damage control assistant, and later served as gunnery officer and main propulsion assistant until his transfer to naval postgraduate school in 1988. Lieutenant Levitt received his master of science degree in information systems management in 1989 and was awarded the Admiral Grace Hopper award. Following graduate school, he reported to surface warfare school in Newport, RI and then joined the U.S. Merrill which was deployed to the Persian Gulf in May 1991. Lieutenant Levitt reported to new construction duty in July 1992 as prospective commanding officer of the fourth Cyclone Class Patrol Coastal (PC) Ship, U.S.S. Monsoon. Command of each of the 13 Cyclone- class ships is available to surface warfare-qualified lieutenants, like Adam Levitt, serving in their second department head tours. At-sea commands usually require their commanding officers to be at least a lieutenant commander who has already served two department head tours. Navy officials discovered a need for a small, fast patrol boat that could pursue minelayers, patrol against terrorists in motor boats and launch special operations forces in small motor boats. The answer came in the form of a Vosper Thornycroft design which is being built by Bolinger Shipyard in Lockport, LA. The PC class ships are named after elements of weather. PCO Lt. Adam S. Levitt will take command of the Monsoon in San Diego on January 22, 1994. I salute Lieutenant Levitt as he enters a new level in his career. I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Lt. Adam Levitt for his dedication and commitment to the U.S. Navy and the United States of America. ____________________
 
The speaker is GORTON and he says  President, I would like to commend Senators Biden and Feingold on their amendment to create a cost-effective and potent Radio Free Asia. I understand that there have been a number of discussions about the amount of funding for this project as well as its status within the Department of State. The compromise represented in this amendment effectively resolves these issues, allowing us to proceed with a project that will become an important part of our Nation's policy toward the People's Republic of China, Cambodia, Laos, North Korea, Vietnam, and Burma. I am particularly pleased that the Radio Free Asia created by this amendment will be given the same corporate ``grantee'' status that allowed Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to broadcast independently of the Department of State. With this designation, Radio Free Asia will act much as a radio station in the target country would if its media were not suppressed. Broadcasts will include extensive, controversial information on events within the country, responses to the state- controlled media, and information on dissident movements--all of which the Voice of America can include, but never to the extent that it might exacerbate diplomatic ties or jeopardize our leases on transmitters. Radio Free Europe included the readings of Vaclav Havel at a time when his books were difficult to obtain. Stations aggressively researched stories, tracked political and artistic dissent, and successfully circumvented Soviet jamming. Broadcasts solidified underground movements, and told listeners of sentiments similar to their own. It fed the passions that overthrew communism, and when complete, was lauded and defended by Vaclav Havel, Boris Yeltsin, and Lech Walesa. After the Tiananmen Square massacre, Chinese state-run television ran a Disney movie. In 1991, Liu Binyan, a Chinese dissident now living in the United States, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that after Tiananmen Square there were 1,500 strikes, but that a vast majority of Chinese knew nothing of them. The media in Vietnam, Burma, Cambodia, North Korea and Laos are just as repressed, and more often than not used as instruments of their governments' policies. With this legislation we are ensuring that the Radio Free Asia we pursue follows the model of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. We are creating a station which can unite and inform the millions in repressed East Asian countries who want democracy, while enlightening those who have known only state-run media. It can deliver insightful investigative reporting, respond promptly to false governmental reports, travel on strong signals, and carry the necessary number of dialects. If it is successful, it will shorten the path for freedom in some of these countries, while merely keeping alive democratic movements in others. Some have argued that the United States should not pursue the funding for a Radio Free Asia. Indeed, our State Department budget is shrinking, while our foreign aid budget is literally strapped. But the threat and possibilities posed by the repressed nations of East Asia made this project worth the effort. The People's Republic of China--the world's most populous nation, and most powerful nondemocratic state--is developing a mighty economy while its political reform lags. As turn- of-the-century Japan proved, political liberalization need not follow economic growth. For the United States, a wealthy but repressed China would be a bane at nearly every turn: it could learn to dominate East Asia, just as the United States seeks to lower its overseas presence; it would hinder our multilateral efforts; and it could exacerbate our already troubled trade relationship. For the countries of Southeast Asia, communism would retain a powerful patron to it north. Conversely, on East Asia whose Communist countries embrace democracy presents staggering possibilities. Their neighbors--Japan, and the newly industrialized nations of East Asia--have enjoyed a miraculous economic growth that has literally changed the world. If freedom takes hold in Laos, Vietnam, South Korea, and Burma, the wealthy community of trading nations in Asia will almost certainly expand again. For China, its economic growth will gain security alongside a healthy, stable government that respects the freedom of its citizens. A Radio Free Asia might not single-handedly change the face of Asia's repressive governments, but it will show our commitment to these countries' citizens, and, as in Eastern Europe, it will strengthen and preserve democratic movements. For governments that have stringently fought our policies, but whose people yearn for freedom, it's an effort we are obliged to make. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  President, over the holidays, my wife and I spent a week's vacation in Florida. It was the first time in many years we have had a week in Florida, and we enjoyed it. While I was in Florida, I picked up the Tampa Tribune, and there was a column by Daniel Ruth in which he talks candidly about the easy politics of calling for more and more prisons and longer and longer sentences and, basically, not doing anything about the crime problem. I cast one of four votes against the crime bill that passed the Senate a few weeks ago. I recognize that it was not a popular vote. I also cast one of four votes against the amendment to spend $3 billion more on additional Federal prisons. We are being ``tough on crime,'' and we can make great speeches about it, but we are not being smart on crime, and it is about time we start getting smart on crime. A few weeks ago, I inserted into the Record an op ed piece from the Los Angeles Times in which a Catholic priest, who is a prison chaplain, asked a group of prisoners in his class what they thought we should be doing to stop crime. It was interesting that very little of what we had in our crime bill coincided with what they recommended--these experts on crime. I ask to insert the Daniel Ruth column into the Congressional Record at the end of my remarks. Let me just add that we now have 510 people per 100,000 in our prisons and jails, more than any other country, by far. South Africa is second with 311, and Canada trails at 109. We ought to be doing some sensible things on crime and not things that get votes for us back home. The article follows: [From the Tampa Tribune] Politics of Prisons Is a Crime (By Daniel Ruth) When the going gets tough, the tough run for governor It's a good thing, too. Because if you're gonna be governor, you gotta be tough. That's because there are all sorts of tough issues, demanding tough decisions, requiring tough people to make those, well, tough decisions. And what tougher problem do we have in this state than crime? Tough problem. But we're blessed in this great state of Florida because all of the men running for governor and even those who aren't running for governor even though they really are running for governor are all tough on crime--every man jack of them. It's a law or something that you can't run for public office, any public office, from student body president at the University of South Florida to governor, unless you've come out foursquare against crime. There are a number of ways to make it clear to the electorate that you're so tough on crime that if Pablo Escobar were still alive, he'd wish he was dead rather than do criminal combat against you because of course you're so galldarned tough on crime. Tougher sentencing is always a popular piece of political jabberwocky. Tougher sentences and longer sentences. Yep, that's the ticket. A tough ticket, too. People just love to hear about tougher and longer sentences. More importantly, they love to hear candidates talk tough about tougher and longer sentences. prison cells like model t's More prisons. And tougher prisons. Even though this state has been churning out prisons like so many Model Ts, the people want more of them. We need more prisons because we have so much crime. And we have to get tough on crime. Because if we don't get tough on crime and stop mollycoddling all these criminals, well, we'll just have to build more prisons. As any politician will tell you, the more attention you need in your bid for office is in direct proportion to how many more prisons beds we need. For example, Gov. Lawton Chiles wants 15,000 new beds. However, Republican hopeful Jeb Bush insists we need 50,000 new beds, which would accommodate a doubling of the existing prison population. You have to talk tough on crime because the voter insists upon it. The voters are rightfully scared out of their wits that some piece of vermin will rob them, or rape them, or beat them or murder them, or perhaps all of that. And what better way to soothe those voter fears than to work harder and tougher than all the other candidates to become the toughest hombre on the campaign trail when it comes to getting tough on crime? Of course, it goes without saying that calling for tougher sentences and tougher prisons accomplishes very little when it comes to curbing crime. That's why you go without saying anything about it. That wouldn't be very tough. A fair amount of lip-flapping Tough crime talk at least makes people feel momentarily secure. It makes them feel and somebody at least cares about them and wants to do something for them, which in the final analysis amounts to only a fair amount of lip-flapping. No politician--at least no pol who wants to get elected--is going to ever level with the voter about crime. That would require telling the public things the public doesn't want to hear. It would require some political courage. The mythically honest candidate would say to the voter: ``If we really want to do something about crime, we must attack a complex range of social issues--all at once. We have to find people jobs so that they don't need to turn to crime. But before they can get a job, they must be educated. And before they can be educated, they have to learn about personal responsibility and developing a work ethic. ``We have to reform a welfare system that tears families apart and creates generation after generation of institutionalized dependence. ``All that and much, much, much more is where crime comes from. And it will take generations to fix what took generations to create. Building more prisons doesn't solve the crime problem--it's like a huge truck that hauls away oranges from the grove. There's always plenty of more oranges left on the trees.'' But you won't hear any of that from the men who would be Lawton. Which may explain, all too sadly, why we will always need more prisons. Tough luck. ____________________
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, New York is one of only two States that has successfully bolstered its National Guard forces with a naval militia. I ask that the first installment of a two-part series describing the history, function, and advantages of the Naval Militia recently published in the Naval Review Association magazine be included in the Record. The article follows: The Naval Militia--Part I. Heritage of the Naval Reserve (By Comdr. Walter J. Johanson, USNR/NYNM and Comdr. William A. Murphy, USNR/NYNM) Editor's Note: This is the first of two articles on the Naval Militia. The second article, entitled, ``Mission For The Naval Reserve,'' will be published in the October edition of NRA NEWS. The Naval Militia in states which have it on their statute books and functioning, consists of those members of the Naval and Marine Corps Reserve who live, work, or drill in the state and who opt to affiliate in its Organized Militia, in accordance with Title 10, US Code. At present, only Alaska and New York have functioning Naval Militia organizations which conform to Federal standards. In the past, many more states had a Naval Militia; in the future, perhaps many more will. In 1991, RADM Joseph Peck, New York Naval Militia (NYNM), now President Emeritus of the Naval Militia Association, reinstituted the policy of promulgating the Naval Militia message to the several States. This effort has had several positive results. The Marine Corps Reserve Officers Association passed a resolution at its 1993 annual convention urging all States to establish a Naval Militia. A similar resolution was passed by the Militia Association of New York, which includes Army and Air National Guard as well as Naval and Marine Corps Reserve members. genesis The Naval Militia came into existence late in the Nineteenth Century because there was awareness of a need for a federally-controlled naval reserve, but Congress did not pass the necessary legislation until 1915. For a quarter of a century the States attempted to fill the void in a manner which also augmented the Militia of the States. The United States Navy, which had been the world's largest during the Civil War, reverted to peacetime insignificance after 1865. Starting in the early 1880's, Congress authorized a building program. It became apparent that appropriations for man-power, though, did not keep pace with the number of billets required afloat. the Navy believed a naval reserve could eliminate the shortfall. In February 1887, Senator Washington C. Whitthorne (D- Tenn.), a former Confederate general, introduced legislation (S. 3320) to establish a United States Naval Reserve. Although a combination of active officers, the Secretary of the Navy, the Naval institute, and concerned civilians supported legislation to establish a naval reserve, many more were not convinced of its necessity. The Congress was unable to take action, and this led the States to take the initiative. James Russell Soley, a Massachusetts resident and a former Navy officer who had participated in a study of European reserve systems, discovered that the governor, in a continuation of colonial-era practice, was designated the ``Captain-General, Commander-in Chief, and Admiral of the land and sea forces of the State.'' He urged the state to use that power to establish a Naval Militia, and the legislature passed an act to that effect on 17 May 1888. Nearly a year later, on 29 April 1889, Rhode Island passed enabling legislation to establish a naval battalion of the State Militia; the same day, Pennsylvania did likewise. New York followed on 14 June 1889 by establishing three battalions of Naval Reserve Artillery and a Naval Reserve Torpedo Corps. California, North Carolina, Texas, and Maryland followed in 1891. South Carolina added a naval militia the next year. The Naval Militia, in addition to developing as a reserve for the Navy, was an incipient reserve for the Marine Corps as well. Starting in 1893, the New York Naval Militia included the 1st Marine Corps Reserve Company. Massachusetts and Louisiana also included units of Marines in their Naval Militia organizations. WAR IN 1898 AND AFTER When, in April 1898, diplomatic relations with Spain were ruptured, there was no overall concept for the wartime employment of the Naval Militia, let alone a detailed mobilization plan. Furthermore, there was no formal contractual relationship between individual members of the Naval Militia and the Navy. Unit activation was impossible; each member had to be processed on his own, with the result that the unit cohesion which had developed for as much as ten years was threatened with being broken up. USS YOSEMITE, all of whose 300 crew members came from the Michigan State Naval Brigade, fought off Spanish forces at the entrance to San Juan, Puerto Rico. The ship was assigned to a task force which at the time the war ended, was preparing for operations against the coast of Spain. The Navy began the Spanish-American War with 12,500 men and ended it with 24,123. Of the increase, 3,832 came from the Naval Militia. Results were uneven but, as demonstrated by YOSEMITE, there was considerable potential for a well- trained, well-organized, adequately-funded reserve force. Almost immediately after the war, the Navy pointed to its wartime experience and requested establishment of a naval reserve under its control to consist of personnel with prior service in the Navy or Marine Corps. Support in Congress was minimal, however, and after several attempts to enact a Naval Reserve failed, the Navy had to be content with improvements on the margins. In 1911, the Naval Militia included about 7,400 officers and men in units in 20 States and the District of Columbia. That year, problems of manning the fleet became acute and the Navy developed plans to fully man its newer ships, while placing others in a reserve status. The latter ships were to be manned by members of the Naval Militia upon mobilization. The Navy came to depend upon personnel of the Naval Militia for peacetime, or contributory, support activity in the years before World War I. Personnel shortages afloat forced the Navy to resort to relieving them by different expedients. In some instances, active duty personnel in shore stations were ordered to sea to man critical billets, and their positions ashore were manned temporarily by Naval Militia personnel. In 1912, in order to sufficiently man ships at a major naval review in New York, the Secretary of the Navy sanctioned an interesting process that was used to gain the services of some 1,000 Naval Militia personnel. They were enlisted on standard four-year contracts but were discharged at the conclusion of the events. In February 1914, Congress passed the legislation to give the Secretary of the Navy authority over the Naval Militia. Before it could be put into practice, however, it was overtaken by events: the early events of the European War led Congress to overcome a quarter century of reluctance and establish the United States Naval Reserve. naval militia and naval reserve Establishment of the Naval Reserve in 1915 did not immediately render the Naval Militia obsolete nor cause it to be abandoned. Indeed, the Navy was never more dependent upon the Naval Militia just before this country became involved in World War I. As the Naval Reserve was first established, it was little more than a data base of prior-service personnel who indicated their availability for reactivation in event of war. As of November, 1915, only 176 men had affiliated with the Naval Reserve. The approach of war led Congress to strengthen the Naval Reserve. An Act of August 29, 1916 established National Naval Volunteer as a category of Naval Reserve membership. Intended for members of the Naval Militia, National Naval Volunteers were to consist of personnel whose naval skills were found by the Navy to meet its standards and who agreed to be available for mobilization. between the wars Congress was unwilling to fund the infrastructure needs of the Naval Reserve, and the previous capital assets acquired by the Naval Militia over twenty-five years were critical: subsequent analysis indicated that, in the period between the wars, where the Naval Reserve was able to exist alongside the Naval Militia as a result of dual membership, it was far more effective than where there was no Naval Militia. By 1936, however, the Naval Militia was declining. Although 19 states carried Naval Militia organizations on their statute books, only ten maintained them as functioning organizations: Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Wisconsin. Nevertheless, for every four dollars that the Federal Government allocated to the Naval Reserve, the states spent one dollar on the Naval Militia. AFTER WORLD WAR II James Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy from 1944 until he became first Secretary of Defense in 1947, was a firm supporter of the Naval Reserve. Forrestal ensured that funding of the Naval Reserve was sufficient for its needs. This reduced the Navy's need for the Naval Militia. Of the original States with a Naval Militia, only New York has kept the Naval Militia as an operating organization (in accordance with Title 10, U.S. Code), but it was joined later by Alaska. THE FUTURE In view of severely declining budgets for the active component, the Navy has come to see the Naval Reserve as a potentially-valuable resource which can be put to use in its day-to-day activity. Overall ``Naval Reserve Policy'' is spelled out in SECNAV instruction 1000.37 of October 1992, where ``Peacetime (Contributory) Support'' allows the Navy to be able to access members of its reserve component whose skills--both military and civilian--can add value by supplementing the skills of active component personnel or where skills for a given task are nonexistent in the active component. Naval Militia organizations, originating a century ago to defend the vulnerable coasts of seaboard states, have the potential to contribute to the defense of vulnerable budgets of state governments which must often respond to unanticipated demands. As the Naval Reserve originated as a data base of personnel who could be used by the Navy as needed but which could be maintained by the Navy at little cost in peacetime, so that Naval Militia could rise again in the form of a data base of personnel, maintained at little cost, but containing skilled personnel available when needed as part of the Organized Militia of the States as provided in Title 10, U.S. Code. Both writers are Life Members of the Naval Reserve Association, and officers of the New York Naval Militia and of the Analysis and Strategy Department of NR Naval War College Support Unit 0119, which supports the Advanced Concepts Department of the Center for Naval Warfare Studies at the US Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island. CDR Murphy is also President of the ENS James F. Burke, Jr. (Westchester County, New York) Chapter of the Naval Reserve Association. CDR Johnson is the Public Affairs Officer of the Naval War College Support Unit; he is the author of several articles on military and security issues and is researching a book on the reformation of the US military from Vietnam to the Gulf War. Historical research data for this paper was originally prepared for Center for Naval Warfare Studies, US Naval War College, Naval Reserve Paper No. 1: U.S. Naval Reserve: The First 75 years, (Newport, RI: Naval War College, 1992). Marine Corps Reserve material is from Reserve Officers of Public Affairs Unit 4-1, The Marine Corps Reserve: A History, (Washington, DC: Division of Reserve, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, 1966). Chapter 659, Naval Militia, Sections 7851 through 7854. State Naval Militia Organizations Massachusetts......................................................1891 California.........................................................1891 New York...........................................................1891 Rhode Island.......................................................1891 Texas..............................................................1891 South Carolina.....................................................1892 Maryland...........................................................1892 Illinois...........................................................1893 Pennsylvania.......................................................1893 Connecticut........................................................1894 Michigan...........................................................1894 Georgia............................................................1895 New Jersey.........................................................1895 Louisiana..........................................................1896 Ohio...............................................................1897 Virginia...........................................................1899 District of Columbia...............................................1899 Oregon.............................................................1899 Florida............................................................1900 Maine..............................................................1900 Minnesota..........................................................1904 Missiouri..........................................................1912 Washington.........................................................1912 Wisconsin..........................................................1912 1955......................................................... ____________________
 
The speaker is McCONNELL and he says  President, it is my pleasure to rise today in order to pay tribute to Stewart Conner of Louisville, KY. Stewart is the managing partner of one of Louisville's premier law firms and just as important a good friend of mine as well as the Louisville community. Conner grew up in Louisville, attending Atherton High School. After a year at Eastern Kentucky University, Conner received a scholarship from the University of Louisville. He graduated in 1963 as the valedictorian of his class, a feat he repeated 3 years later graduating from cum laude Louisville's law school. Conner came by these achievements through hard work and discipline, attributes he garnered from his family. Conner says his father believed ``that if you work hard enough you may not get everything you want, but you can get most anything.'' President, I don't believe any motto better sums up the pathway which leads to the American dream. Following school he joined the prestigious law firm Wyatt, Tarrant & Combs. Unfortunately, 2 years after joining the firm his Army National Guard unit was activated for service in Vietnam. Conner served at Gia Le, South Vietnam, 60 miles northwest of Danang. While he was away his law firm continued to pay him one half of his salary and held his job for his return. Because of this generosity, Conner and his young family did not have to suffer undue hardships. This loyalty was not forgotten by the young attorney. He quickly rose through the ranks and was elected partner in 1972, and served as chairman of the general corporate law section from 1980 to 1990. Additionally, Conner has served on the firm's executive committee since 1980 before beginning his current position in 1990. He wins rave reviews from all who deal with him on a professional and personal basis. Despite his numerous responsibilities, Conner has the ability to make each person he deals with important and unique. Conner also finds the time to serve on several boards, including the Kentucky Council on Higher Education, Kentucky Chamber of Commerce, Old Kentucky Home Council, and the Boy Scouts of America. As you can imagine President, Stewart Conner is a driven and compassionate man. I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this outstanding Kentuckian. In addition, I ask that an article from Business First be included in the Record at this point. [From Business First, Jan. 3, 1994] Refocused Stewart Conner Chose Law Over Burgers (By Ron Cooper) Girls and other ``distractions'' caused Stewart E. Conner's grades to take a nose dive when he was a senior at Atherton High School in 1958-59. ``I was in the top half of the bottom fourth of my class,'' says Conner, ``and I was convinced I'd end up being a hamburger flipper. Then my faculty adviser told me to start thinking about learning a trade.'' That was a major turning point in life for the 51-year-old Conner, managing partner of Wyatt, Tarrant & Combs, Kentucky's largest law firm. ``I had decided tentatively to join the military and learn a trade,'' recalls Conner. ``But my parents talked me into giving college a try. Then they put it all on the line for me. They gave me their (lifetime) savings of $900 for tuition and room and board.'' Conner enrolled at Eastern Kentucky State Teachers College at Richmond (now Eastern Kentucky University) following graduation from Atherton in 1959. He excelled academically, enough to secure a scholarship to the University of Louisville in his sophomore year. Initially, he was uncertain which career to pursue. He was driven by a determination to remain in school and to make his parents' financial sacrifice stand for something. In that he succeeded. He was valedictorian twice at U of L. The first time was in 1963, when he earned a bachelor's degree in business management, then again in 1966, when he graduated from law school cum laude. Conner says he was determined to make a mark at Eastern, and later U of L. One motivation was his recollection of how fellow students at Atherton had become National Merit scholars. He knew he was just as capable of achieving that status, he says. Because he had done so poorly with grades in high school, he says, ``I had a bit of an inferiority complex'' to overcome. After he earned his undergraduate degree at U of L, Conner says he had a chance to enter a sales career for any number of firms. That prospect did not intrigue him. A law career-- with its emphasis on logic--did. Conner was the youngest of three children of the late James P. and Lucille Conner, who raised their family in the Highlands area. His father was a construction foreman, and his mother was a long-distance telephone operator for South Central Bell. The family lived modestly, and Stewart Conner had to work for everything he achieved. He had good role models. ``All Dad had was a seventh-grade education, but he also had a lot of street sense in how he dealt with people,'' Conner says. ``And he had a strong work ethic. He believed that if you work hard enough you may not get everything you want, but you can get most anything.'' Scholarships paid only a portion of his tuition during his university days. Among the positions that Conner held to pay the remaining portion were social worker, hod carrier and clerk for a real estate title company. Conner says the work ethic is so ingrained in him as to be almost consuming. Little spare time is available in his schedule of overseeing the 175-lawyer Wyatt, Tarrant firm, and of conducting a practice in which he serves several noteworthy clients. His personal clients include PNC Bank, Kentucky, and Trans Financial Bancorp Inc. of Bowling Green, KY. ``A couple of years ago, my wife Jef told me I should have a hobby,'' he says. ``So I took up trains.'' Conner assembles Lionel train sets; he has three of them set up in the basement of his home in the Federal Hill neighborhood near Locust Grove. Conner says he views Wyatt, Tarrant as a second family, and little wonder. In 1968, two years after he joined the firm--then named Wyatt, Grafton & Sloss--his Army National Guard unit was activated for service in Vietnam. ``I was 27 years old and just earning my spurs at the firm, getting to work on some larger cases,'' he says. At that time, he was a married man with a newborn daughter, and the ink barely dry on a first mortgage. A private's pay in the Army was only $127 a month, $6 less than the monthly mortgage payment. But the Wyatt firm paid one-half of Conner's salary the entire year that he served at Gia Le, South Vietnam, about 60 miles northwest of Danang. That allowed Conner and his spouse, Nancy Flick Peterworth, to keep their home. Conner, who rose in the ranks to staff sergeant, served as assistant to the chief of staff of his artillery unit. The young attorney's job at Wyatt, Tarrant was kept open, awaiting him on his return from service in Vietnam in October 1969. ``Needless to say, that experience wed me to these people,'' he says of his fellow partners at Wyatt. ``The firm has been a constant in my life.'' The feeling is mutual. ``He's an absolutely superb lawyer, extremely thorough, with excellent and sound judgment along with common sense,'' says Wilson Wyatt Sr., senior partner at Wyatt, Tarrant. Conner was hired fresh out of U of L in 1966, when Wyatt learned of the young attorney from the law school dean. Gordon Davidson is Wyatt, Tarrant's executive-committee chairman. He served as the firm's managing partner from 1978 until Conner succeeded him in 1990. He says: ``Stewart is a loyal and dedicated friend, and my number-one, right-hand guy. And his devotion and loyalty to the firm is unbelievable.'' Upon his return from the war, Conner rose quickly in the ranks at the law firm. He was elected partner in 1972, and served as chairman of the general corporate law section from 1980-90. He has served as a member of the firm's executive committee since 1980. Clients and professional associates speak highly of Conner. J. David Grissom, former chairman of PNC Bank, Kentucky, described the attorney as ``a very thoughtful, intelligent and capable individual.'' ``Although he has an extremely heavy workload and a large array of clients and is managing partner of the firm, he makes you feel you are his only client,'' said Grissom, now a principal in Mayfair Capital in Louisville and formerly with the Wyatt firm. Michael Harreld, president and chief executive officer of PNC Bank, Kentucky, says Conner has made a mark serving the financial-services industry in the state. ``He's smart, very good at explaining complex legal problems in lay terms,'' Harreld says. ``He's a good communicator.'' Conner represented Citizens Fidelity Bank & Trust Co. in its merger with PNC Financial Corp. in 1986. That year, he also worked with Wyatt, Tarrant partners in representing the Bingham family in their sale of The Courier-Journal, WHAS-TV and Standard Gravure Co. Jefferson Circuit Court Judge William McAnulty Jr. met Conner when both were members of the Leadership Louisville Class of 1981. He was, and is, impressed. ``For one of the best lawyers in the state, he has to be one of the most even, down-to-earth people I've known,'' McAnulty says. ``He's just a regular guy.'' When he's not at work, Conner makes time for civic activities. Among the those is serving as a member of the executive committees of the Kentucky Council on Higher Education and the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce, and a board member of the Old Kentucky Home Council, Boy Scouts of America. He has three daughters by two previous marriages. His children are Shannon Smock, 25, a teacher at Miami University of Ohio; Erin Conner, 20, a sophomore at the University of Dayton; and Maggie Conner, 11, a sixth-grader at Louisville Collegiate School. He is married to the former Jef Fish, who has three children by a previous marriage. Connor says the blended families spend two weeks a year at a remote lake in Michigan. His spouse is the former executive director of Leadership Kentucky. They've been married for five years. Jef Conner says she and her husband are very compatible. She is former president of the Ronald McDonald House board in Louisville, a charitable enterprise that has her husband's full support. The couple spent part of their Christmas Eve decorating trees at the 20-bedroom facility at 550 S. First St., where parents of hospitalized children stay. The couple attends Southeast Christian Church. Jef Conner describes her husband as ``very easy going and the most patient person I've ever known. He's also my best friend.'' Speaking professionally, Stewart Conner says he expects Wyatt, Tarrant to remain a predominant force in the region's legal community. And he hopes that he can build on his leadership skills. ``There's a difference between a manager and a leader,'' he says. ``A manager tells you how to go from point A to point B. A leader takes you.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  President, today the Conference on Disarmament opens in Geneva. The No. 1 item on its agenda is negotiation of a Comprehensive Test Ban [CTB] Treaty. This treaty banning all nuclear weapons tests has been the goal of U.S. Presidents back to Eisenhower. Achieving a CTB has been a standing treaty commitment for the United States and Russia--then the Soviet Union--since the Limited Test Ban Treaty, which halted nuclear weapons explosions in the atmosphere, was signed in 1963. But underground explosions continued for the three following decades by the United States, Russia, Britain, France, China, and eventually India. The nuclear powers again committed to conclude a CTB Treaty when the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT] was signed in 1968, and for 25 years the non-nuclear nations that signed the NPT have looked for progress on a CTB. That is what they explicitly expected in return for their compliance with the NPT. But although negotiations continued and even neared completion during the Carter administration, CTB talks were suspended with the invasion of Afghanistan. Now, today, the Clinton administration is taking its effort to finally conclude a CTB to the international stage. I believe there are several reasons why the time is ripe for quick progress in these talks: The NPT comes up for review and potential extension in the fall of 1995, and the non-nuclear signatories have made clear they expect a CTB be in hand or near-at-hand if they are to support extension of the NPT. There is now in place a voluntary, mutual moratorium on tests by all the nuclear powers except China, which tested once last fall. As President Clinton correctly observed last July, ``nuclear weapons in the United States arsenal are safe and reliable,'' and the U.S. does not need more testing at this juncture. In yet another sign that the cold war is over, these CTB talks begin with the two superpowers essentially on the same side, both voluntarily halting their tests and seeking a permanent global halt to all tests. Not since the end of World War II has a major arms treaty negotiation begun with such common purpose and objectives. Earlier today, John Holum, Director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, gave his opening address to the conference. I ask unanimous consent that it be included in the Record at the conclusion of my remarks, and I encourage my colleagues to read it. Although there is no formal schedule or deadline for the CTB negotiations, President Clinton recognizes that it would be in the clear interest of the United States to conclude them as quickly as possible. Holum has noted that it is the goal of the United States to reach multilateral agreement on a CTB Treaty well in advance of the 1995 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty extension conference. And his address today restates U.S. policy to conclude the negotiation of a CTB Treaty ``at the earliest possible time.'' Holum continues, ``obviously, no country can unilaterally set the pace. I assure you that as compared to some past deliberation on this issue, the United States will be out front pulling, rather than in the back dragging our heels.'' That declaration demonstrates true leadership and rededication to the imperative of stemming proliferation of nuclear weapons as these talks begin. President, I believe these statements by Holum today reflect substantial congressional sentiment, that the current multinational moratorium on nuclear tests be converted into a permanent CTB Treaty as soon as possible. We have demonstrated that intention through legislation passed in 1992, and the administration has recognized that with its statements today. A strong CTB treaty, which will be a cornerstone of our nuclear non- proliferation efforts for many years to come. The address follows: Statement of The Honorable John D. Holum, Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Geneva, January 25, 1994 Thank you, President. On behalf of the United States, may I first wish you every success as you guide the work of this body to begin this important year. You will have the complete cooperation of the United States delegation. I thank your predecessor, Ambassador Zahran of Egypt, for his wise and skillful performance of the challenging duties of president. I would also like to congratulate the new personal representative of the Secretary General of the United Nations, Vladimir Petrovsky, and express our confidence that we will have with him the same close and productive relationship that we enjoyed with his predecessor. President, ladies and gentleman. This is my first opportunity to address a session of the Conference on Disarmament (CD) as the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. This forum serves the cause of a safer and more stable world, and my presence here today reflects the commitment of the Clinton administration to the goals of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation. Upon my confirmation, the President reiterated to me the high priority he personally gives to making concrete, rapid progress on strengthening international security through multilateral cooperation. The end of the cold war has created particular opportunities for the CD, and I am here today to pledge to you that the United States will do everything in its power to make the most of them. In this regard, I would like to read out to you a message to the Conference from President Clinton: ``I am grateful for the opportunity to address all those who are participating in the Conference on Disarmament. This Conference has several important items on its agenda as the 1994 session begins, including transparency in armaments, and it may assume others, such as a ban on fissile material production for nuclear explosive purposes. None is more important than the negotiations of a comprehensive and verifiable ban on nuclear explosions. This challenging, but crucial, objective is the conference's top priority. It reflects our common desire to take decisive action that will support and supplement the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and will further constrain the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons. ``Regional instabilities, the end of the cold war, and the growing threat of proliferation of nuclear weapons have created new and compelling circumstances to encourage progress in disarmament. Accordingly, I decided last July to extend the moratorium on the United States nuclear weapons tests and committed the United States to achieving a comprehensive test ban treaty. At the same time, I called on the other nuclear weapon states to observe a testing moratorium, and I do so again today. ``I am confident that Ambassador Ledogar and the U.S. delegation will join with you in taking bold steps toward a world made safer through the negotiation at the earliest possible time of a comprehensive test ban treaty that will strengthen the security of all nations. You have my best wishes during this important conference.'' (End text of President's message.) The CD is the only multilateral forum to address global arms control and disarmament issues on a continuing basis. Its membership covers every region of the globe and reflects a wide range of concerns and interests. We have all come to accept the CD as both a marketplace of ideas and a place where nations get down to practical business and conclude the agreements that enhance international security. The United States recognizes the importance of the CD as a multilateral arms control body, and we have consistently supported appropriate membership expansion. We do, however, insist that it is inappropriate to elevate the status in the CD of a state whose behavior continues to be flagrantly opposed to the goals of the organization. It is our hope that CD members will continue working together to forge a consensus on an acceptable membership package. The conclusion of the chemical weapons convention (CWC) vividly demonstrates how the constructive competition of ideas and the pursuit of diverse interests and concerns can produce achievements to benefit the entire international community. I congratulate you on that signal accomplishment. However, this is not the time for us to rest. There is much work to be done; the demands are immediate; and we have a unique opportunity to help to shape the world constructively. The end of the cold war actually has increased the need for arms control. There are new sources of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them. Formerly contained ethnic tensions have emerged in areas where adversaries are all too ready to use violence as the instrument of first resort. Sadly, there is abundant evidence that we still live in a world where technology advances faster than human wisdom. Arms control can help us meet the challenge of bringing peace and stability to a troubled new world order. We can limit and reduce destabilizing military forces. We can prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them. We can contribute to confidence and trust through greater transparency about our military activities. Doing these things is not a sign of weakness or of capitulation; it is a wise investment in the future and a sure way to underwrite all of our vital national interests. Much is underway. Less than three weeks ago, the Presidents of Ukraine, the Russian Federation, and the United States signed a statement that opens the way to the elimination of nuclear weapons in the Ukraine. It provides for the transfer of all nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory to Russia for their dismantlement, while recording agreement on compensation for Ukraine, previewing the security assurances that the United States, Russia, and the United Kingdom will provide Kiev once it accedes to the NPT and Start 1 enters into force, and reiterating the U.S. commitment to assist in eliminating strategic systems on Ukrainian territory. This trilateral statement advances the interests of all three countries and of the international community in general. It will accelerate the entry into force and implementation of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (Start), bolster the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), and lead to the dismantlement of thousands of nuclear weapons. Equally important, this agreement should help establish a pattern of stable political relationships. It can contribute to an environment in which democratic reform, economic vitality, and social harmony can be pursued without dangerous distraction. Arms control and confidence-building efforts are being seriously pursued elsewhere at the regional level--including the arms control and regional security (ACRS) working group created as part of the Middle East peace process, the new regional forum created by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the historic progress on arms control and non-proliferation in Latin America, and the agreement in principle between India and Pakistan to establish a multilateral dialogue on regional security and nonproliferation. Similarly, we were encouraged when CSCE ministers decided last December in Rome to begin discussions in the forum for security cooperation of possible arms control contributions for settling the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. Manifestly, the arms control negotiating tables are now located not only in the conference rooms of Washington and Moscow and the committee rooms here in Geneva, but also in Buenos Aires; in New Delhi and Islamabad; in Cairo and Tel Aviv; and in many other places around the globe. While the venues are varied, the objectives are closely linked. The CD has been the proving ground of new ideas and has set in motion a new dynamic and a new spirit of international negotiations. a challenging agenda With this dynamic in mind, let me turn to some of the major items of business that will occupy you in the days ahead. comprehensive test ban treaty In the short time I have been in Geneva, I have already sensed the great anticipation of our forthcoming negotiations of a comprehensive test ban treaty (CTBT). And we should be excited. A CTBT is long overdue. We are beginning the final steps in a journey of too many years. Let me be clear at the outset: U.S. policy--announced by President Clinton on July 3--is one of strong support for concluding a CTBT at the earliest possible time. Now, in the aftermath of the cold war, a CTBT becomes even more important. A CTBT will be an important part of our efforts to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons and will place a major restraint on the nuclear-weapon states. The United States has been working hard--as have many of you--to ensure a smooth start to the negotiations. We were pleased to be able to cosponsor the United Nations resolution supporting the objectives of a CTBT. Its acceptance by consensus provides a strong base from which to launch your negotiations. The consensus at the U.N. shows there is now virtually universal support for a CTBT. While the issues are complex, they are not beyond our immediate reach; we should be able to work out the essential elements of a treaty expeditiously. ``At the earliest possible time'' means just that. Obviously, no country can unilaterally set the peace, and we should avoid arbitrary deadlines. But I assure you that, as compared to some past deliberation on this issue, the United States will be out front pulling, rather than in the back dragging our heels. A CTBT will be fully successful only with the participation and support of the five nuclear-weapon states and with broad international adherence. The nuclear-weapon states bear a special responsibility to contribute to these negotiations, and you have our commitment that the United States will meet its responsibility. For the United States, a tangible demonstration of our commitment to the CTBT is our continuing moratorium on nuclear testing. In his message to you, which I read to you just a few moments ago, the President has again urged the other nuclear-weapon states to refrain from testing. strengthening the npt regime With the end of the cold war, we have moved from a bipolar world to a multipolar world. The threat of nuclear proliferation remains, and with it the need to preserve the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) as the primary bulwark against the further spread of nuclear weapons. The NPT reflects a broad consensus against nuclear proliferation. The treaty also establishes a framework for preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, and for facilitating and regulating cooperation among states in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. And it has proved an important instrument for enhancing the social and economic development of its members. The U.S. welcomes the substantial progress made at the second meeting of the preparatory committee for the 1995 NPT conference, including the decision to open its proceedings to observers from both non-party states and non-governmental organizations. The prepcom reaffirmed the importance of consensus as its method of decision-making, and it agreed on the background documentation the parties will need from the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and other organizations to support their work. The prepcom also unanimously endorsed the candidacy of Ambassador Jayantha Dhanapala of Sri Lanka for the presidency of the 1995 conference. The work of the prepcom is all the more important because of the end to which it is directed. The United States is committed to make every effort to achieve the NPT's indefinite and unconditional extension in 1995. Without a stable and durable non-proliferation regime, which includes a strong NPT, further arms control methods will be jeopardized. Indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 will ensure that the many benefits the NPT provides to its parties will remain available. By indefinite extension, the international community will send to would-be proliferators the clearest possible signal that their activities are not acceptable. The threat of nuclear proliferation has diminished in some regions, such as Latin America and Africa. We need to ensure that for the future such regional security benefits provided by the NPT are not mortgaged by a decision to limit its extension. The full weight of the NPT membership behind a treaty of unlimited duration would be a formidable political force for non-proliferation. Moreover, it would provide an essential foundation for building further on the historic measures already taken to limit, reduce, and dismantle nuclear weapon systems. fissile material cut-off Our objective of reshaping the nuclear contours of the post-cold war security landscape does not end there. The successful implementation of the Treaty on Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF), the implementation of unilateral initiatives, such as reduction and dismantling of tactical nuclear weapons, and strategic arms reduction agreements, including Start I and Start II, were significant contributions to the process of halting the spread of nuclear arms. Now we can add not just the CTBT negotiations and NPT extension, but also negotiations for a global agreement to prohibit further production of highly enriched uranium and plutonium for nuclear explosive purposes or outside of international safeguards, as President Clinton urged in his address to the United Nations last September. Such an agreement should be formally negotiated here in the CD. We were greatly encouraged by the consensus support at the UN for such a convention. A non-discriminatory, multilateral, and effectively verifiable fissile material production ban could bring the unsafeguarded nuclear programs of certain non-NPT states under some measure of restraint for the first time. It would also halt the production of plutonium and highly enriched uranium for nuclear weapons in the five declared nuclear-weapon states. negative security assurances Negative security assurances are also related to the cause of non-proliferation. We adhere to a policy that has been reiterated by several previous administrations, namely: The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear-weapon state party to the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty (NPT) or any comparable internationally binding commitment not to acquire nuclear explosive devices, except in the case of an attack on the United States, its Territories or Armed Forces, or its allies, by such a state allied to a nuclear-weapon state or associated with a nuclear-weapon state in carrying out or sustaining this attack.'' As we have stated repeatedly in this forum, the United States is open to discussions on this issue. We cannot disinvent nuclear weapons; but we can control them. We can limit their impact and influence. Deep reductions in nuclear weapons inventories, strengthened and extended non-proliferation norms, conclusion of a CTBT, a global ban on fissile material production, and other measures will alter fundamentally the role of nuclear weapons in the world of the twenty-first century. All these steps will contribute to the important goal we all share--a safer and more stable world. the challenge of conventional weapons The devastating destructive power of nuclear weapons and the dangers posed by other weapons of mass destruction demand that they remain high on our arms control agenda, but they cannot be the only items. Another crucial element of the arms control equation is conventional arms. We are reminded daily that the end of the cold war has not by any means removed all conflict and danger from the world. Regional arms races and destabilizing accumulations of arms well beyond those realistically needed for defense are all too common. Reversing these trends is a global responsibility. We can help reduce the sources of tension that generate such accumulations. We must continue working to discourage the use of arms in resolving disputes. The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) is a landmark in the reduction of conventional weapons. It serves as the foundation for a post-cold-war security architecture in Europe based on cooperation rather than confrontation. We look forward to its full implementation in 1995, and note with satisfaction that tens of thousands of items of equipment have already been destroyed. The immediate challenge to this forum is to promote greater transparency about security matters. Transparency in turn fosters the greater confidence and trust upon which stable political relationships can rest. Last year the CD created the ad hoc Committee on Transparency in Armaments (TIA). As the first new committee established by the CD in a number of years, it demonstrated the CD's ability to adapt to the challenges of the post-cold- war era. It is important as well because it is the only item on your agenda that addresses the conventional arms challenge. I strongly encourage you to build on the very useful work begun in the TIA ad hoc committee last year. I also recommend the ideas put forward last year by the United States to promote transparency regarding conventional arms. Some object that we should instead pay even more attention to weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them. Let us discuss those concerns seriously, but let us not create yet another setting where we repeat ourselves endlessly to the point where other important business is neglected. If we slacken in our willingness to address the conventional weapons problems that first gave rise to the TIA initiative, we will not make much progress, and we will begin to slide away from our global conventional arms control objectives. Just as in the nuclear area, the work done here in Geneva on conventional arms will have a significant impact on related efforts elsewhere. We share your pride in the successful initiation of the UN Register of Conventional Arms. The first year's experience with the register was good--but not good enough. Eighty-two responses represent answers from less than half the UN's membership. We must do better; our goal should be universal participation, which your work here at the CD can encourage. The United States also looks forward to the experts' meeting on these issues in New York next month. We will play an active part in moving their efforts to a successful conclusion. Another conventional arms issue on which we have taken a first step relates to land mines. These weapons continue to wreak havoc on civilian populations whether or not they are any longer in an active war zone. The UN has supported by consensus the U.S.-initiated resolution calling for a moratorium on the export of anti-personnel land mines. We must now take the next step and make the global moratorium a reality. In doing so, we not only protect the futures of many innocent civilians, but we also draw attention to a range of problems long thought too difficult for arms control to solve. This process will also be fortified by this year's experts' deliberations leading to a review conference on the convention on weapons that may be deemed to be excessively injurious or have indiscriminate effects. Although not presently a party to this convention, the United States will closely follow the progress of the conference as an observer, and the President intends to submit the convention to the United States Senate this year for advice and consent to ratification. These positive developments can mutually reinforce one another, forming a tide that can break down resistance to progress on the conventional arms control agenda. The CD should help swell that tide. an extensive agenda remains In my closing minutes, President, let me briefly touch on the other developments and other issues that are part of U.S. arms control, disarmament, and non-proliferation efforts. Despite the fact that the chemical weapons convention has now passed beyond the CD's purview, I know that many of you remain keenly interested in its fate. In Washington this past November, President Clinton submitted the CWC to the United States Senate for advice and consent, and will push for ratification early this year. The United States urges every other signatory to do the same, so that the convention will enter into force for the critical parties at the earliest possible date. The United States has also been pleased by the progress made by the preparatory commission in The Hague on elaborating the complex procedures that will guarantee the convention's smooth and effective functioning. The biological and toxin weapons convention (BWC) has been strengthened since its entry into force by the increased membership and by the confidence-building measures developed by successive review conferences. We believe the world can go further. President Clinton has announced that the United States will promote new measures to increase transparency of activities and facilities that could have biological and toxin weapons applications. The United States also supports the work of the ad hoc group of government experts convened to identify and examine potential BWC verification measures from a scientific and technical standpoint. We support an early conference to consider the report and to discuss the next steps to strengthen the international norm against a scourge that could well become the next weapon of mass destruction of choice. The Clinton administration's non-proliferation policy also attempts to find solutions where non-proliferation norms have not taken hold. The United States has taken a strong stand against any North Korean nuclear weapon ambitions. In coordination with many other countries, we have made it clear to North Korea that, to resolve the nuclear issue, it will have to provide the international community with assurance that it does not possess nuclear weapons and it will not build them in the future. This means that North Korea must remain a full party to the NPT, fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), including accepting regular and special inspections, and fully implementing the denuclearization agreement reached by North and South Korea. Our position remains unchanged: North Korea will have to meet these obligations aimed at ensuring a nuclear weapon-free Korean peninsula and a strong international non-proliferation regime. Proliferation threats are acute in South Asia and the Middle East. The United States is encouraging India and Pakistan to join in a multilateral effort to examine regional security and arms control issues. We continue to support the activities of the Middle East arms control and regional security working group. The diffusion of missile technology makes the world a more dangerous place for all of us. The United States wants to strengthen the missile technology control regime to ensure that it continues to be an effective vehicle to combat missile proliferation. Conclusion President, the Conference on Disarmament is strengthened by its success with the chemical weapons convention negotiations. It is energized by the prospect of the negotiations on a comprehensive test ban treaty. It is challenged by the demands of enhancing transparency in armaments. It is bolstered by important arms control developments beyond these halls. Our responsibility now is to make the most of the opportunity before us. The task is immediate; but our results will be long-lasting. The challenges are enormous; but they are matched by the promise of profound results. The path will be difficult; but it will be worth every effort when we arrive at our destination. Let us get down to work. Thank you. ____________________
 
The speaker is RIEGLE and he says  President, I rise today to speak to the important issue of education and how our education system in the United States can be enhanced by the passage of S. 1150--Goals 2000: Educate America Act. Two recent studies highlight just how important education is to our country and to its citizens. Last fall Education Secretary Richard Riley released a study indicating that only 59 percent of our fourth graders could meet basic reading standards for their age, and that 75 percent of our high school seniors could meet their basic standards. These figures are even more alarming in light of the fact that many of the kids in dire need of improvement have already dropped out of school by grade 12. While analysis of our education system usually centers on school children 18 and younger, a second study confirms that substandard education does indeed have an ongoing negative impact on our citizens and on the country as a whole. This survey, which has been described as the most comprehensive study of adult literacy in the United States in over two decades, provides evidence of how education, employment, citizenship and the well being of our Nation are intertwined. According to this study, roughly half or 47 percent of adult Americans fell into the lowest two of five literacy levels. These adults can perform only the most simple reading and writing tasks; one- fifth of those surveyed ranked in the lowest literacy level. For these adults--an estimated 40 million Americans nationwide--it is impossible to determine the total cost of a purchase, to locate an intersection on a map, or enter information on a simple form. Tragically these Americans fell through the cracks of our education system, and continue to fall through the cracks of our society--experiencing high unemployment, high poverty rates, and little hope of self-improvement. We have an opportunity to do something about these troubling numbers and to ensure that today's young people will receive the basic skills they need. In 1989, a bipartisan group of State and national leaders gathered to form what we now refer to as Goals 2000. Over the past few years, the spirit in which these goals were drawn up has been enhanced by the bipartisanship and broad support these goals have received. The Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources has strengthened these goals, making very clear that parental involvement and State and local control are critical elements in the education of our children. And while Washington cannot offer any magic solutions or silver bullet answers to our troubled education system, we can do what we must do-- offer leadership and provide assistance. This legislation has received broad national support that includes parent groups, business organizations, labor unions, school administrators, boards of education, and Governors. S. 1150 codifies the national education standards that were formed by that 1989 meeting between the Governors and the President. By enacting these standards we make clear that education is a top priority for our country, and I believe we enhance our chances of reaching these goals as we enter the 21st century. It is important to highlight the words that are included in the purpose of this legislation: ``Creating a vision of excellence and equity that will guide all Federal education and related programs.'' It is time that we stepped up to that responsibility and assisted our communities, school systems, and families in creating that vision. Some will argue that this is Government interference or another Federal mandate, but the reality is that this bill does not contain mandates and in fact gives the Secretary of Education the power to grant important waivers if Federal regulations are impeding critical reform efforts at the State and local level. Instead of mandates, this bill provides incentives and financial help to States that are striving to reform their education systems. This legislation is also important because it recognizes the role of education in our work force and how that education directly affects our economy. Included in this bill are provisions to help States create their own improvement plans, assistance in professional development, and a number of provisions that tie our education system to the economy including the establishment of a National Skills Standards Board. While continuing the theme of the voluntary nature of this legislation, we make a statement that we are willing to offer the leadership and direction that education has been lacking. I endorse this bill because it is time for this Nation to move ahead, it is time for the country to look toward the year 2000 with a goal of greatness. I want to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the senior Senator from Massachusetts, Senator Edward Kennedy and the other Members of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources-- both Democrats and Republicans--who worked very hard at crafting a bill that has such broad bipartisan and national support. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent the Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of House Concurrent Resolution 197, providing for a joint session of the Congress, just received from the House; that the concurrent resolution be agreed to; and that the motion to reconsider be laid upon the table.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. So the concurrent resolution (H. Con. Res. 197) was agreed to. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of House Concurrent Resolution 198 relating to the adjournment of the House of Representatives just received from the House, that the concurrent resolution be agreed to, and the motion to reconsider be laid upon the table.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The concurrent resolution (H. Con. Res. 198) was agreed to. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, let me just say to colleagues that in a few moments we will be requesting by unanimous consent that there be a vote tomorrow morning, with the Senate coming in prior to that for morning business, and then there will be a recess period this evening between now and the time we assemble for the joint session of Congress for the State of the Union Message, and momentarily I will propound the appropriate unanimous-consent request. I believe Senator Helms will proceed tomorrow morning after the first vote, and I believe that the vote will be at approximately 10:30, by 10:30, and subsequently Senator Helms will proceed with two amendments that he has, both of which will require votes, and after that the bill will be open for further amendment. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, on behalf of the majority leader, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate stand in recess until 8:35 p.m., and that upon reconvening at 8:35 p.m. the Senate assemble as a body and proceed to the House of Representatives for the purpose of receiving such communication as the President of the United States wishes to make during the joint session; that at the close of the joint session, the Senate then stand in recess until 9 a.m. Wednesday, January 26; that on Wednesday, following the prayer, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date and the time for the two leaders be reserved for their use later in the day; that there then be a period for morning business not to extend beyond 10:30 a.m., with Senators permitted to speak therein for up to 5 minutes each, with the time from 9 a.m. to 9:40 a.m. under the control of Senator Simpson or his designee, and with the time from 9:40 a.m. to 10:20 a.m. under the control of the majority leader or his designee, with Senator Gorton recognized for up to 10 minutes from 10:20 to 10:30 a.m.; that at 10:30 a.m., the Senate resume consideration of S. 1281, the State Department authorization, and that upon resuming the bill and without intervening action or debate the Senate proceed to vote on or in relation to the Helms amendment No. 1248.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? The Chair hears none, and it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, if there is no further business to come before the Senate at this time, I ask unanimous consent we stand in recess as previously ordered. There being no objection, the Senate, at 6:43 p.m., recessed until 8:35 p.m.; whereupon, the Senate reassembled when called to order by the Presiding Officer [Campbell]. ____________________
 
The speaker is CAMPBELL and he says  Under the previous order, the Senate will now proceed to the Hall of the House of Representatives. Thereupon, at 8:35 p.m., the Senate, preceded by the Secretary of the Senate, Walter J. Stewart, and the Sergeant at Arms, Martha S. Pope, proceeded to the Hall of the House of Representatives to hear the address by the President of the United States. (The address by the President of the United States, this day delivered by him to the joint session of the two Houses of Congress, appears in the proceedings of the House of Representatives in today's Record.) ____________________
 
E





The speaker is BERMAN and he says  Speaker, I am honored to pay tribute to my close friend Jerry Cremins, who has been a leader in the building trades in California since 1969. Jerry is retiring this year. Before that, he was a representative for the plumbers union in Los Angeles. Jerry has always reinforced my own beliefs in the importance of labor unions to the economic well being of working men and women in America. Jerry's life has been dedicated to bettering the lives of American workers. I have been honored to work with him on a number of issues important to the labor movement and have always found Jerry to be tough-minded but fair, a capable and accomplished representative of labor's interests in the political arena. Jerry has enjoyed a distinguished career in the labor movement. In 1976 he became executive secretary of the Los Angeles Building Trades Council; 7 years later he was elected president of the State Building and Construction Trades Council of California, which represented 24 local building trades councils and over 40,000 members in the State. Unions have accomplished much in the country--and can do so again with leaders of the quality of Jerry Cremins. With hard work, perseverance, and intelligence--qualities Jerry has in abundance--the rights of working men and women can be safeguarded. I ask my colleagues to join me in saluting Jerry Cremins, a towering figure in the labor movement in southern California, a wise and shrewd leader and a good friend. ____________________
 
The speaker is STARK and he says  Speaker, today I would like to take a few minutes to recognize Hoffman-LaRoche for their generous grant to the Parenting Preemies Program at Family Health Plan of Alviso of San Jose, CA. This grant, by allowing for the continuation of the innovative Parenting Preemies Program, will not only benefit those directly involved in the program, it will also serve to improve the health of the entire community. LaRoche's invaluable interest in the San Jose community is greatly appreciated. It is the involvement of businesses like Hoffman-LaRoche that allows organizations such as Parenting Preemies in San Jose to successfully try new ideas and programs that are meant to improve the lives of everyone in the community. Again, I'd like to extend my heartfelt thanks to Hoffman-LaRoche for their generosity and impressive civic mindedness. ____________________
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  Speaker, in the rough and tumble business of simply doing business, I am proud to report that the economic climate in my home city of Santa Fe, NM is such that new businesses are sprouting up in this new year. One such new venture is Santa Fe Business, a new bimonthly newspaper which will debut on President's Day, February 21. The main goal of this new publication is to help Santa Fe's businesses do better and play some part in increasing the economic strength of not only New Mexico's capital city, but the entire State as well. I congratulate Santa Fe Business publisher Susan Bodenstein for starting this important business which is designed to help other small businesses succeed in these competitive times. I urge my colleagues to join me in honoring the Susan Bodensteins of our Nation who are undertaking risks, investing their money and time, starting businesses, hiring workers, and helping make our country and our people prosper. ____________________
 
The speaker is SOLOMON and he says  Speaker, you have to be pretty tough to compete in the rough-and-tumble world of professional hockey. If you also happen to be a woman, you also have to be especially talented. That's why I and everybody else from my hometown of Glens Falls, NY, and the surrounding area are especially proud of goalie Erin Whitten, the first American-born woman ever to play the sport on the professional level. In fact, she is good enough to make everyone in the world of hockey forget her gender and appreciate the abilities she first displayed in the Adirondack Youth Hockey Association when she was seven years old. With Erin in the net, the Glens Falls High School's boys' hockey team compiled a record of 21-9-2, thanks to Erin blocking 84.6 percent of the shots against here. She was the first woman to participate in the division 2 high school state championships, and received an 1988-89 all-conference honorable mention. At the University of New Hampshire, Erin was a four-time ECAC Goalie of the Year, the University's 1992-93 Women's Athlete of the Year, a two-time ECAC player of the week, and two-time Concordia University tourney player of the game. Her women's hockey record of 46 saves in one game still stands. Her 4-year save percentage at the University of New Hampshire was 91 percent, and the women's hockey team posted a record of 54-14-4. Erin was recognized by the New England Sportswriters Association. After college, Erin starred with the 1992 U.S. Women's National Team, the 18 to 22 year old select U.S. Women's Team at the North American Challenge at Lake Placid, and the 1993 U.S. Olympic Sports Festival in San Antonio, TX. After a brief stint with her hometown team, the Adironack Red Wings of the American Hockey League, Erin was signed by the Toledo Storm of the East Coast Hockey League. Last October 30th, Erin became the first women goalie to post a win in a regular season professional hockey game, when Toledo Storm beat Dayton. Currently, Erin is with the Dallas Freeze of the Central Hockey League, where we can expect her to continue compiling a number of firsts. And so you can see why her parents, Peter and Joan Whitten of Glens Falls, are so proud of her. I am, too. On February 3, the Women's Sports Foundation will celebrate the eighth annual National Girls and Women in Sports Day. Erin will be honored, along with several other women of comparable achievement in sports. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me for our own tribute to an outstanding athlete, Erin Whitten of Glens Falls, NY. ____________________
 
The speaker is VISCLOSKY and he says  Speaker, it is my distinct honor to recognize James and Imogene Harris. James and Imogene were honored at the annual Martin Luther King, Jr. breakfast sponsored by the Gary Frontiers Service Club on Monday, January 17, 1994. The couple received the highest distinction bestowed by the club, the Drum Major Award. The Drum Major Award is awarded to members of the community who have committed themselves to the elimination of inequality, prejudice, and racism. Recipients of this award have demonstrated long-term dedication to their community by assisting in the eradication of injustice. Leaders in the African-American community, James and Imogene Harris have been providing Gary with 32 years of uninterrupted circulation of the Gary Info News. A weekly publication, the Info has been instrumental in upholding Gary's issues, affirmative action concerns, and equal opportunity affairs. James and Imogene have dedicated their lives to the betterment of Gary's African-American community, and have shared their publication with Gary to unite its citizens against injustice, inequality, prejudice, and racism. I would like to take this opportunity to commend James and Imogene Harris in their 30-year commitment to instill equality and justice throughout the city of Gary, IN. ____________________
 
The speaker is HOYER and he says  Speaker, I rise today to honor the prominent career of Assistant Commissioner Ronald A. Nervitt who will retire this month from his position as Chief Executive of Information Resources, Financial Management Service of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Nervitt has held this position since October, 1984, and his departure will be a great loss to his colleagues and the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Nervitt's career in the U.S. Government began more than 35 years ago. His extensive career includes service in the National Security Agency, the General Services Administration, and the Naval Intelligence Processing System Support Activity. Under his guidance and leadership, Nervitt successfully directed major programs in telecommunications, computer systems design and implementation, computer security, high speed digital transmissions, and bulk encryption. Among his most notable accomplishments, Nervitt was responsible for implementing the first digital transmission systems in Defense networks in the seventies and led the efforts to implement the first secure voice systems for telephones in the eighties. As the Chief Executive of Information Resources, Financial Management Service at the Department of the Treasury, he developed and implemented the first ``electronic signature'' system for certifying payments, converted the computer system to produce paper checks, and directed the implementation of a new check payment and reconciliation system. Nervitt's strong sense of civic responsibility and professional successes have been recognized throughout his outstanding career. In 1975 he was awarded the Meritorious Civilian Service Award, he received Secretary Brady's Citizenship Award in 1992 and a meritorious Presidential Rank Award in 1993. Speaker, Assistant Commissioner Ronald A. Nervitt's distinguished career and service to the citizens of the United States is characterized by his keen insight, and the execution of progressive policies. Because of his innovative pursuits many Government agencies are now operating more efficiently and with a greater sense of security. We are very fortunate to have had such a committed man serve in the U.S. Government. ____________________
 
The speaker is MALONEY and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to a New Yorker who has given so much to our great city. When Paul Crotty recently accepted the position of corporation counsel to the city of New York, he acted to continue his distinguished career of public service. Prior to assuming this position, Crotty had served as commissioner of housing preservation and development from 1986 to 1988, as commissioner of finance from 1984 to 1986, and as commissioner of the office financial services before that. Crotty has also served as chair of the New York City Employers Retirement Corp. and the Housing New York Corp. Crotty has also had an impressive career in private practice with the law firm of Donovan Leisure Newton and Irvine. He graduated from the University of Notre Dame in 1962, and spent 2 years thereafter on active duty in the U.S. Navy. Crotty then attended Cornell Law School, from which he graduated with distinction in 1967 as well as being awarded the school's first Fraser Prize for his accomplishments. As commissioner of finance, Crotty was responsible for administering the city's taxes, including the real property tax system which assesses over 900,000 parcels of real property on an annual basis. In that capacity, Crotty also helped draft New York's income and expense legislation, and led the big ticket sales tax investigation of sellers of luxury goods who filed false sales tax reports. As commissioner of housing, Crotty was responsible for the creation and implementation of a 10 year, $4.2 billion housing program. Crotty developed innovative new mechanisms for the allocation of capital funds which created, rehabilitated or preserved over 250,000 dwelling units in New York City. In recognition of these achievements, Crotty received the City Club of New York's Bard Award. I am also proud to count Paul and his wife, Jane, as my close personal friends. And as his past record showed, New York City is lucky to have Crotty's services once again as corporation counsel. That's why I hope all of my colleagues will join me in saluting him for his record of public service and wishing him the best in his new capacity. ____________________
 
The speaker is PARKER and he says  Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me today in honoring an outstanding group of young men, the Brookhaven Academy Cougar football team of Brookhaven, MS, and their coaches, supporters, fans and parents on winning the school's first-ever Class 2A Mississippi Private School Football Championship. The Cougars on November 19, 1993, defeated the Greenville Christian School Saints in a 21-18 victory for Lincoln County's first State football title. The Cougars, led by alumnus Coach Herbert Davis Jr., came from behind with less than 7 minutes left in the championship game. A cliffhanger ending nearly occurred but, with 3 seconds left in the game, the Saints missed a field goal that would have tied the score, and the Cougars marched on to victory. I applaud the players on both the Brookhaven and Greenville teams for their courage and sportsmanship and their fans for their devotion to the teams, their schools and the sport itself. The Brookhaven Academy Cougars exemplify the American spirit of competition, fair play and pride. Their supporters also deserve praise--the fans for their unwavering pride and spirit; the parents for supporting and encouraging their children and taking the responsibility of ensuring players, cheerleaders, band members and student volunteers are able to attend each practice and game; and the coaches and teachers for their positive leadership, understanding and guidance in this championship and in their efforts to help all students experience academic excellence. I ask you to join me in saluting the Brookhaven Academy Cougars for their dedication to excellence, their positive attitudes and pride in their school and in Mississippi. ____________________
 
The speaker is BARLOW and he says  Speaker, today I rise to announce the introduction of the Education Savings Assistance Act of 1994. I am honored that my colleague from Kentucky, Representative Scotty Baesler is a cosponsor of this measure. The ability of Americans to provide for our children's college or advanced vocational education has declined significantly in recent years due to escalating college tuition expenses and cutbacks in Federal student aid. This trend has occurred at a time when advanced education is becoming more important if our children are to compete in a more competitive economy. In 1988, the Commonwealth of Kentucky established the Kentucky Educational Savings Plan Trust [KESPT] in order to provide parents with assistance in saving for their children's future. To further this goal, Kentucky enacted legislation that enables parents to establish special education savings accounts. This legislation also provides tax-free treatment for any gains earned on these accounts, and allows parents to lock-in tuition rates at current levels for Kentucky colleges and universities that participate in the program. While the plan is still in its infancy, there is general agreement that it is a resounding success. In this era of budget discipline and increased personal responsibility, and with our Nation facing an increasingly competitive world, it is just plain good common sense that we should provide assistance in the form of Federal tax incentives so that we assist our citizens in improving their skills for the high-technology, highly skilled work force of the next century. This legislation that I am introducing today will provide a Federal tax exemption for gains earned on qualified State educational savings programs similar to the program established by Kentucky. This legislation will encourage parents to plan ahead for the benefit of their children and improve the overall savings rate for our Nation that has significantly declined in recent years. I urge all Members of both parties to support this legislation as it proceeds through the legislative process. ____________________
 
The speaker is MANTON and he says  Speaker, I rise today to congratulate 19-year-old Kevin Chiaramonte of Middle Village, NY, for achieving the highest honor in Scouting, becoming an Eagle Scout. To become an Eagle Scout, one must meet a number of requirements. These include attaining 20 merit badges and displaying leadership in school, Scouting, and the community. Kevin has demonstrated his leadership abilities not only in the Scouting community, but in the social and educational communities as well. Kevin was born in Brooklyn, NY, and attended elementary school at St. Margaret's in Middle Village, NY, and continued at the Regis High School where he received a full scholarship. While in these two institutions of learning he took part in chorus, drama, high school C.C.D. programs, and of course, Boy Scouts. Currently, he is working toward receiving his bachelors degree from Boston University. Kevin's Scouting career consisted of 5 years in Cub Scouts and 7 years as a Boy Scout. While in the Scouting program he has held numerous leadership positions, including patrol leader, assistant senior patrol leader, senior patrol leader, and quartermaster. He has received 2 religious awards, over 21 merit badges, and 11 skill awards while a Scout and has received the highest Scouting honor Eagle Scout this past July. I know my colleagues will join me in congratulating Kevin on becoming an Eagle Scout. ____________________
 
The speaker is SAWYER and he says  Speaker, last week we observed the 65th anniversary of the birth of one of America's greatest leaders, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. The King holiday provides us with the opportunity to renew our commitment to Dr. King's dream of achieving peace, racial harmony, cultural tolerance, and equality of economic opportunity. The observance of Dr. King's birthday is coordinated through the tireless efforts of the Martin Luther King, Jr. Federal Holiday Commission, on which I have the pleasure of serving. In addition to promoting the King holiday, the Commission has devoted countless hours to passing on Dr. King's legacy and teachings to our children, who will shape the future of the community of nations. With its limited resources, the Commission sponsors activities throughout the year aimed at combating violence, crime, drugs, and illiteracy, as well as promoting voter registration and urban economic development. The Commission also places a heavy emphasis on educating our young people about alternatives to violence and crime and teaching them the skills they need to settle disputes and conflicts nonviolently. If Dr. King were here today, what would he think of our society and our world? Conditions have improved since his untimely death. However, we continue to grapple with issues such as racism, the lack of affordable health care, and senseless acts of violence that are growing at an alarming pace. I believe that it is time for all of us to practice the politics of inclusion, so that Americans of all races and ethnic backgrounds may share in the challenge of economic recovery and social healing. That is why I sponsored the ``King Holiday and Service Act,'' along with a good friend, Congressman John Lewis of Georgia. The Martin Luther King, Jr. Federal Holiday Commission is scheduled to expire in April. H.R. 1933 would extend the life of the Commission for 5 years. I believe that enactment of this legislation is necessary because the Commission still has an important role to play in making the King holiday a meaningful and inclusive observance for all Americans. ____________________
 
The speaker is SWETT and he says  Speaker, I invite my colleagues to join me today in paying tribute to Alexander J. Hebert--an outstanding employee of the New Hampshire Employment Security Department for over 30 years. Speaker, Alexander J. Hebert retired on December 9, 1993 following 37 years of service in Employment Security. Beginning as a mail clerk and then as a claims taker, Alex has spent the last 25 years as a Veterans' Employment Representative. As a veteran of the Korean war, Alex truly understood the needs of his fellow veterans. For the past 25 years he has been dedicated to providing them with services and counseling. This dedication has gained him the respect of veterans throughout New Hampshire. In addition, many employers throughout the State have grown to respect and appreciate Alex for his willingness to assist them with their employment needs. Alex was recently honored with a certificate of appreciation from the Department of Labor for having achieved all requirements in the Veterans' Compliance Standards for 1992. This is in addition to the countless letters of thanks he has received from veterans and employers. Speaker, Alexander J. Hebert exemplifies the rock-solid values that are typical of the people of New Hampshire. His loyalty, dedication, and hard work deserve our respect and our recognition. I urge my colleagues to join me in honoring Alexander J. Hebert for his lifetime of contributions to the citizens of New Hampshire. ____________________
 
The speaker is FILNER and he says  Speaker, I rise today to honor Scott Alevy of Chula Vista, CA, the founder and president of Citizens Revolting Against Airport Siting Hype--also know as CRASH. When powerful special interests tried to impose a new airport in my district, an airport which would create serious noise, pollution, and traffic impacts on the people I represent, Alevy led a grassroots citizen effort to restore common sense. Under Alevy's leadership, CRASH held meetings, wrote letters, published articles, gathered information, circulated petitions, issued press releases, and ensured that the voice of ordinary people would prevail. Because of Alevy's tireless efforts, the citizens of Chula Vista and the entire South Bay region will finally have confidence that the integrity and character of their neighborhoods will not be compromised by a misguided airport plan. Recently, Alevy was asked to explain his motive for giving up so much of his personal time and privacy to lead this difficult fight. In characteristic style, he simply explained that he is a parent--a parent who cares about the future his children will inherit and a parent that is dedicated to leaving his community a better place than he found it. I am proud to count Alevy amongst my friends. His spirited campaign to save our neighborhoods is a tribute to his concern for our future and his devotion to his community. Now that his efforts have been proven a success, it would have been inappropriate for this Congress to fail to recognize his immeasurable contribution. ____________________
 
The speaker is GREENWOOD and he says  Speaker, resting in a secluded area of Holland PA, lies a small high school surrounded by over 200 acres of beautiful farmland once owned by William Penn and later the Cornell family of pre-Revolutionary times. The Villa Joseph Marie High School, attended by 250 young women, was founded by Mother Maria in 1932 when she traveled from Chicago to purchase this small farm for the Sisters of St. Casimir. The school started with 3 students and has grown to its present enrollment of 250 students led by its principal, Sister Mary Elaine. The Sisters of St. Casimir and the lay faculty have enjoyed success in the classroom with over 98 percent of the graduates going on to college. Success in athletics also is evident. The epitome was the soccer team's victories which led to the Pennsylvania State Championship against schools with enrollments as much as 10 times larger than the Villa's. The 1993 team had to rebuild due to the loss of six starters and 85 percent of its offense. The rebuilding effort was successful and resulted in a victorious season and championship of the academy league. The team entered the district one playoffs as the No. 3 seeded team. The team defeated West Chester Henderson High School 2 to 1 in the quarter-finals and then came from behind to defeat Connestoga High School 2 to 1 in the semi-finals. In the district one championship game Villa again came from behind to defeat Mount St. Joseph Academy 3 to 1 to earn a second trip to the State playoffs. In the first round of the State playoffs Villa defeated Danville High School 2 to 0. The team traveled to Somerset, PA, to play Mount Lebanon High School which was ranked No. 1 in the Nation by the National High School Soccer Coaches Association and U.S.A. Today newspaper. Mount Lebanon's team had a perfect record of 25 wins for the year. In a game played in heavy rain and ankle-deep mud, the much smaller Villa players fell behind 1 to 0 early in the first half. Somehow the Villa's players were able to gather the strength and will to play beyond their limits. Late in the second half, the team scored on a head goal by Cindy Long with less than 8 minutes left to play. The exhausted Villa team, playing in the mud and rain, assisted Erin Schlussel to achieve the winning goal with 77 seconds to play. A tired, but happy team returned to the Villa at midnight to prepare for the State championship game the following week. The team arrived at Shippensburg University on a cold and windy day for their second attempt at winning the State championship. This time the opposition was Erie McDowell High School. Despite McDowell's early goal, goalie Aileen Kevane worked diligently to turn away every shot to keep her team in the game. Early in the second half, freshman Tina Kuchler scored a goal to tie the game 1 to 1. The game ended tied. The first and second overtime periods maintained the tie. When the teams entered the third, sudden death overtime, it was Villa's Michele Canning who scored the goal that secured the State championship. The 1993 team was lead by cocaptains Aileen Kevane and Cindy Long. Other members of the champion Villa Joseph Marie soccer team include: Michele Canning, Erin Schlussel, Melina Kuchinov, Megan Sweeney, Kelly Pedrotty, Colleen McDonald, Nicole Rihl, Colleen Eves, Chris Casile, Erica Rauchut, Briar Mac Adams, Jaime Yhost, Lauren Cameron, Jamie Diven, Katie Craig, Justina Smith, Tina Kuchler, Bridget Rauchut; and Beth Markow. Head coach John McOwen was assisted by Dave Dilts, John Byford, and Marc Khodarkovsky. I want to extend my warmest congratulations to all the players, coaches, parents, and supporters of this championship team. ____________________
 
The speaker is BERMAN and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to Bishop Benjamin Crouch, who for decades brought his ministry to poor people around California. Bishop Crouch's magnificent career in the church culminated in 1983 with his consecration as bishop in the Church of God in Christ. It was within the Macedonia Church of God in Christ that Bishop Crouch and his beloved wife, Catherine, who died last year, began their pastoral ministry in the California town of Val Verde. Fired by ambition and the desire to serve the people, Bishop and Crouch expanded their work to include reaching out through television and radio; programs conducted at jails and hospitals; drug rehabilitation; and high school and campus ministries. By the end of his life Bishop Crouch had preached in nearly every major city in the United States, as well as many foreign countries. The role Bishop Crouch played in strengthening the Christian community in California cannot be underestimated. In 1951, for example, he and his wife, along with just a handful of parishioners, founded Christ Memorial Church. In 40 years the church has become an institution in the San Fernando Valley, with several hundred members. Its continued growth is a fitting legacy to the life and work of Bishop Crouch. I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the memory of Bishop Benjamin Jerome Crouch, a man of faith who served his people with wisdom and love for decades. He will be missed. ____________________
 
The speaker is STARK and he says  Speaker, throughout the land, the push is on to get people to sign up in managed care health plans. In many cases, that is a good and healthy movement that can improve service and save money. In other cases, it is greedy marketing that is the equivalent of malpractice and fraud. Of particular concern is the marketing being done to the Nation's disabled and elderly. The enclosed letter from a community health clinic in Berkeley describes the kind of problem that can occur and why we need to do more to educate and protect the elderly and disabled. Over Sixty Health Center, Berkeley, CA, November 2, 1993. Health Plans, Claims Division, San Francisco, CA Re: Mary Smith. To Whom It May Concern: Today, I had the unfortunate duty of informing the above patient that she could no longer come to us for Medical services. As a member of Over 60 since 1992, she was unaware that she had signed her Medicare benefits over to you and had to see a physician over 10 miles away in Orinda, California. She remembered signing up for your coverage but was totally oblivious to the implications of its restrictions. She had never heard of an Orinda Physician Dr. ------ which your records show as her primary provider. I asked your telephone representative why a senior female who has had two hip replacements surgeries, who does not drive and who lives so far away would select a doctor in Orinda, CA? Her reply was ``That's the doctor she selected and I can't do anything about it.'' Smith was admitted to Alta Bates Hospital in August, 1993. Since she believed that your insurance was Medi-Gap coverage, she continued to see and be followed by Physicians from our office. Attached are our claims for the services provided to your member. ------ ------, Billing Systems Manager. ____________________
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  Speaker, I join the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Service in proudly recognizing the joint effort of the Forest Service's Cuba, NM, Ranger District and the citizens of the Cuba area in their efforts to plan for the future. In an effort to develop a long-term economic development strategy for the Cuba area, the Cuba Ranger District of the Santa Fe National Forest assisted the Cuba area in applying for a $30,000 grant under the Economic Diversification Study Program. The result was the Future Search Conference which brought together over 80 stakeholders who together identified commonly held values, skills, and experiences. Focusing on the past, the present, and the future, stakeholder groups came up with both short- and long-term action plans to begin strategically implementing their ideal future. The major success of the Future Search Conference was the bringing together, for the first time, of a large group of diverse people to talk about and cooperatively plan for the future. I urge my colleagues to join me in congratulating the Cuba Ranger District and the many local citizens who played a critical role in this joint public-private enterprise. I hope communities in other States learn and benefit from this New Mexico experience. ____________________
 
The speaker is EMERSON and he says  Speaker, one of candidate Clinton's most popular campaign promises was, ``to end welfare as we know it.'' In tonight's State of the Union Address, President Clinton is expected to offer the administration's support for welfare reform along with his welfare reform policy guidelines. Whatever initiatives the President chooses to pursue with regard to welfare reform, the legislation will need a forum. Today, I am introducing with my good friend from Delaware, Mike Castle, a bill which will give Congress a new way of doing business. Our legislation will create a welfare ad hoc committee to facilitate and expedite the development and passage of comprehensive welfare reform legislation. In June, the Welfare Simplification and Coordination Advisory Committee released a timely report on our Nation's public assistance programs. I believe this study, authorized by my amendment to the 1990 farm bill, lays the foundation for substantive welfare reform. The prevailing opinion of the distinguished members of the Welfare Simplification and Coordination Advisory Committee is that, The conglomeration of separate programs that supposedly comprise our ``welfare system'' do not form a system at all. Instead, each operates in its own separate orbit, assisting a specific population, without regard to the multiple needs of the families it serves. The fragmented public assistance system is exacerbated by the committee system in Congress. Right now, a comprehensive welfare reform bill would be referred to at least four House committees and five subcommittees. While multiple jurisdictions can offer different perspectives and new ideas to an issue, in the welfare arena, the jurisdictional overlap has not generated a comprehensive, coordinated, and simplified welfare system. During the Joint Committee on the Organization of Congress' hearings, I heard a great deal of testimony regarding committee realignment urging changes. These suggestions ran the gamut, from minor tinkering to fundamental committee realignment. Several congressional scholars suggested--as an option--that Congress make use of its authority to create temporary ad hoc committees in order to respond to issues in a timely manner. Our bill would do just that. Now is the time for the Congress to change the way it does business. Welfare recipients need welfare reform. The taxpayer deserves welfare reform. The welfare ad hoc committee will provide a forum for comprehensive welfare reform. ____________________
 
The speaker is SOLOMON and he says  Speaker, to tell you the truth, if there were more Democrats like Loren Sullivan, I'd still be one. In all seriousness, I have no trouble in crossing party lines to pay tribute to an outstanding public servant who happens to be a Democrat. Such a man is Loren Sullivan, who retired January 1 as a member of the town council of Fort Edward, NY. His service to the community goes back to 1956, when he won a seat as a village trustee. He served on the village board for two terms and then took a short break from politics. He returned to run for a seat on the town board, and was elected to two 4-year terms. He stepped down again to devote more attention to his job in the cost accounting and payroll department of Sandy Hill Corp. But 10 years later he was raring to go again. He rejoined the town board in 1984, and when then-supervisor Daniel Hayes resigned, Loren Sullivan wound up serving 23 of Hayes' 24 months in office. He left office in 1987, the same year he retired after 40 years at Sandy Hill. He returned for one more term on the town board in 1992. We can all envy Loren Sullivan for never losing any political race he ever entered. But that isn't all. He has found the time to coach fifth grade basketball and little league, and indicates he'll continue in that capacity. He is also looking forward to spending more time with his family. And I hope he has many years to do just that. Speaker, I ask you and all Members of this House, from both parties, to join me in tribute to one of the finest public servants I've ever known, Loren Sullivan of Fort Edward, NY. ____________________
 
The speaker is VISCLOSKY and he says  Speaker, it is my distinct honor to recognize Alonzo Swann, a World War II veteran and hero from Gary, IN. Swann was honored at the annual Martin Luther King, Jr. breakfast on Monday, January 17, 1994. Swan was awarded with the Navy's most prestigious medal, the Navy Cross. On October 29, 1944, the aircraft carrier U.S.S. Intrepid came under attack by the Imperial Japanese Navy aircraft. The Japanese, using Kamikaze planes, crippled the aircraft carrier, impairing almost all of its anti-aircraft batteries. Swann's crew, comprised entirely of African-American servicemen, fought courageously, disabling the Kamikaze plane, and saving the Intrepid from destruction. Nine of Swann's 21-member crew died during the assault, and the remainder sustained serious injuries. Although wounded, Swann and the rest of the crew remained at their posts, fighting until the attack was over. I commend the courage of Swann and the crew in the rescue of the U.S.S. Intrepid, which has now become an historical relic. I would like to take this opportunity to honor Alonzo Swann, and all of the men of the U.S. Intrepid for their perseverance. Swann and the rest of the officers are men truly deserving of this long overdue recognition. ____________________
 
The speaker is HOYER and he says  Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to commemorate the retirement of a distinguished leader in the Prince Georges County public school system, Dr. Joyce A.M. Thomas. Her extraordinary career included many significant contributions to our community and her retirement will be a great loss for the students and parents of Prince Georges County. Dr. Thomas is a pioneer in the field of education. Her innovative perspectives and strategies are well known not only in the State of Maryland but also throughout the country. Dr. Thomas was the force behind the development and implementation of the nationally recognized Magnet Program. This program offered the students of Prince Georges County the opportunity to enhance their learning experiences, and pursue specific educational interests. Since the program's inception in 1985 it has grown from two programs in 10 schools to 16 programs in 52 schools. Dr. Thomas also initiated and coordinated the first full time Project Head Start Program for Prince Georges County and coordinated the Follow Through Program for the county. This project encouraged students to realize their full academic potential with pride and confidence. Dr. Joyce A.M. Thomas has dedicated her career to the educational advancement of the residents of Prince Georges County. Her tireless devotion and unremitting hard work have made a tremendous difference in the quality of many lives. For this, Speaker, we owe her a great debt of gratitude and our warmest wishes for great happiness in her future endeavors. ____________________
 
The speaker is MALONEY and he says  Speaker, I rise today to bring to the attention of my colleagues an important event which took place on Wednesday, December 1, 1993, in Queens. At this event, the Queens Chapter of Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays [P-FLAG], the Queens Lesbians and Gay Pride Committee [QLGPC], and Queens Gays and Lesbians United [OGLU] will honor Queens Assistant District Attorney D. Willas Miller as he receives P-FLAG's first annual Morty Manford Award. Miller, who has served as Queens District Attorney Richard Brown's liaison to the gay and lesbian community, was recently promoted to supervisor, special victims bureau of the office of the Queens district attorney. His leadership in the Queens community and his tremendous work in the district attorney's office have been recognized, and, at 31, Miller is now the youngest supervisor in that office. Miller was born in upstate New York and graduated cum laude from Boston University. Thereafter, he distinguished himself at Duke University Law School, from which he received his degree in 1988. Miller worked in the legal field in both Boston and North Carolina before obtaining a position in the Brooklyn district attorney's office. There he served 4 years with distinction as a felony trial attorney in the sex crimes specialty unit, before accepting a felony trial attorney position in the Queens district attorney's sex crimes/special victims bureau in January 1992. At that time, he became the first liaison to the gay and lesbian community in the Queens district attorney's office history, and the only district attorney gay liaison citywide who is also an attorney. Miller also serves as a member of the mayor's police council on gay and lesbian concerns. Miller received an award in memory of Morty Manford, a former assistant attorney general for New York State. A founder of Gay Activists Alliance [GAA], Manford died of AIDS at his home in Flushing in 1991. Manford was an early leader in the gay rights movement. From his days as an undergraduate at Columbia University, Manford showed his commitment to the cause of equal rights for gays and lesbians. In addition to GAA, Manford founded Gay People of Columbia University, one of this Nation's first gay campus groups. His mother, Jeanne Manford also founded P-FLAG, which has grown into a national organization. In giving Miller the inaugural Morty Manford Award, P-FLAG recognized Miller's similar commitment to the rights of gay and lesbians, as well as to the rights of all New York City residents. I am also pleased that his dedication and drive have been recognized in the form of his promotion, and I hope that my colleagues will join with me in congratulating Miller for his achievements and wish him the best in his new position. ____________________
 
The speaker is PARKER and he says  Speaker, today I stand in the Halls of Congress, in the people's chamber, to speak in honor of an outstanding citizen from my district, John Wesley Morgan of Brookhaven, MS. J.W. Morgan has dedicated his entire life to the betterment of Brookhaven, which is not just his hometown, but the place he has called home his entire life. Born to the late Jim Morgan and Bertha Hooker Morgan, he is a graduate of Alexander High School, where he will be honored by his friends, his wife, Elouise Brown Morgan, and his colleagues, January 29, at the junior high auditorium. Morgan has given so much of himself to Lincoln County. He served as a member of the Brookhaven Housing Authority from December 1972 to May 1975. He served as president of the Alexander Junior High School PTA from 1978 to 1979 and was elected as alderman of ward one in 1977. He now is serving his fifth term as alderman and is mayor pro tempore of Brookhaven. Morgan is a member of the chamber of commerce, the NAACP, Mason Keystone Lodge No. 73, and the Kiwanis Breakfast Club. He serves on the board of directors of the United Givers Fund [UGF]. Morgan was the first African-American in Mississippi to obtain a license as a radio announcer. He became a deejay in 1952 for WCHJ. He continues to host the ``Spiritual Time'' program on Sundays from 6 to 10 a.m. He has been an employee of State Bank for more than 31 years, since beginning in August 1962 as a messenger. Morgan also has attended St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church his entire life, where he has served as Sunday school superintendent. In 1970, he was ordained as a deacon, and he currently is church treasurer. I salute
 
The speaker is J.W and he says  Morgan for his community spirit and dedication to building a better Brookhaven. His example is one worth following. Morgan, congratulations and thank you. ____________________
 
The speaker is FURSE and he says  Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of my colleagues the National Science Foundation publication, ``From Desktop to Teraflop: Exploiting the U.S. Lead in High Performance Computing.'' This report is important for two reasons. First, it makes the benefits of high performance computing comprehensible. It explains how the investments we make in high performance computing are both prudent and beneficial. From the pharmaceutical, to the automotive, petroleum, and aerospace and defense industries, high performance computing has become a catalyst for U.S. industrial competitiveness. The second reason I highlight this report is that it provides information relevant to the June 1993 CBO report, ``Promoting High Performance Computing and Communications.'' That earlier report limited its evaluation of HPCC benefits to the computer industry alone and overlooked benefits that accrue to other industries that use high performance computing. The National Science Foundation report documents the success of the HPCC program and credits it for maintaining U.S. leadership in high performance computing. ____________________
 
The speaker is LAZIO and he says  Speaker, our Nation's welfare system was created with the noble intention of providing assistance to the truly needy. Yet, it is generally agreed that the system has gone sour, and is rife with fraud and abuse. There is a legitimate, and well substantiated, concern that through fraudulent manipulation of the system, many welfare recipients are receiving benefits to which they are not entitled. This year--or possibly next--Congress will, hopefully, consider legislation to overhaul this complex system which has become a financial albatross around the necks of American taxpayers. Even before that debate begins, we can act now to tighten-up existing welfare-fraud detection efforts. Today, I am introducing a bill calling upon the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct a feasibility study on the use of finger- imaging, or other biometric technology such as retina scans, to verify identity in order to help reduce fraud in the welfare program. This study will examine the effectiveness and availability of fingerprinting technology, and allow us to examine how it may contribute to welfare reform with the goal of saving tax dollars. Programs such as this are not without precedence. Recently, my former colleagues in New York's Suffolk County legislature enacted a law requiring that recipients of public assistance be screened by a finger imaging identification system. Similar projects are being tested on a limited basis in two other New York counties. These programs have been running for 15 months and have saved the State nearly $700,000. According to published reports, a study conducted by the New York Department of Social Services found that the State could save $46 million a year if it adopted a statewide finger-imaging program. During his State-of-the-State address, Gov. Mario Cuomo called for an expansion of New York's pilot fingerprinting programs. Los Angeles County has been running a similar experimental program since 1991. That project has saved $6 million during the first 6 months of its operation and is projected to save about $18 million over 5 years. Soon after L.A. County implemented its program, 3,021 people refused to be fingerprinted and dropped out of the welfare system, 242 people were denied benefits for submitting multiple applications, and 126 people were caught in outright cheating. Since then, the program is reported to have been weeding out about 30 people a month who were trying to defraud the system. If the savings suggested by these pilot programs are even in the ballpark, then we should not waste any time in moving this idea forward as an important component of welfare reform. Reducing fraud in the welfare program will not only cut costs, it will ensure that welfare assistance goes to those people who honestly need help, not those who are cheating the system and the taxpayers. ____________________
 
The speaker is BEREUTER and he says  Speaker, this Member commends to his colleagues this editorial that appeared in the South Sioux City Star on January 6, 1994, regarding the relationship between school quality and the number of two-parent families in a State. [From the South Sioux City Star, Jan. 6, 1994] Quality of Education Not Dependent on Funds In a 1992 book ``America's Smallest School: The Family,'' Paul Barton argues that a more powerful measure of school quality than the pupil-teacher ratio is the parent-teacher ratio. He notes that in recent decades the proportion of children living in single parent families rose rapidly and school performance, measured by standardized tests, declined. The proportions of children in single-parent families vary substantially among the states, so some conclusions are suggested by data such as: In a recent year, North Dakota had the nation's second highest proportion of children in two-parent families, and the highest math scores. The District of Columbia ranked last on the family composition scale and next to last in test scores. Empower America and the American Exchange Legislative Council recently released a report bristling with facts inconvenient for certain theories and factions: Between the 1972-73 and 1992-93 school years, a 47 percent increase in spending on public education for grades kindergarten through 12 coincided with a 7 percent decline in school enrollment and a 35-point decline in SAT scores and pupil-teacher ratios declined in 50 states. However, in 1992-93, none of the five states with the highest teachers' salaries was among the 15 states with the top SAT scores. And the 10 states with the lowest per pupil spending included four--North Dakota, South Dakota, Tennessee and Utah--among the 10 states with the top SAT scores. New Jersey has the highest per pupil expenditure, an astonishing $10,561, which teachers' unions elsewhere try to use as a negotiating benchmark. New Jersey's rank regarding SAT scores? 39th. North Dakota ranks 44th in per pupil expenditures ($4,423), and 49th in teachers' salaries but second in SAT scores and graduation rates. South Dakota ranks last--51st--in teachers' salaries ($24,125) but third in SAT scores and sixth in graduation rates. For understandable if insupportable reasons, the public education lobby has long argued for judging school quality not by cognitive outputs--standardized measurements of what students learn--but by monetary inputs, principally the number of teachers and staff and their earnings. The fact that the quality of schools correlates more positively with the quality of the families from which children come to school than it does with education appropriations will have no effect on the teachers' unions insistence that money is the crucial variable. The public education lobby's crumbling last line of defense is the miseducation of the public. ____________________
 
The speaker is SOLOMON and he says  Speaker, ``Toughest of the tough.'' That's how everyone who has known Hank Bauer describes him. That's the kind of marine he was for 34 months in the Pacific. And that's the way he played baseball for 11 years with the Yankees and later led the Baltimore Orioles to a pennant. I suppose some of you who are fans of teams the Yankees dominated during their golden years wanted to forget all about Hank Bauer. After the Yankees brought him up he joined an outfield that already featured Joe DiMaggio and Mickey Mantle. During his career, Hank Bauer went to nine World Series and broke several records. He played fair and he played hard. That's the way he did everything. He was never too busy to help the Marine Corps in their annual ``Toys for Tots'' campaigns. That's what we might expect from someone who earned a Silver Star, Bronze Star, and two Purple Hearts in such places as Guadalcanal, Tinian, and Okinawa. He's still carrying some shrapnel he picked up in Okinawa. Last October 27, Hank Bauer was operated on for cancer. I've been told that the operation was successful, but that long months of rehabilitation are ahead. But Hank Bauer has already faced the rigors of combat and pitchers the likes of Bob Feller and Warren Spahn. We can be sure he will attack rehabilitation like he has everything else in life. Speaker, I may be a die-hard Dodgers fan, but I'm still proud to ask this body to join me in wishing Hank Bauer, the pride of the Yankees and an outstanding marine, a speedy recovery. Semper fi, Hank. ____________________
 
The speaker is BONIOR and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to Mount Clemens General Hospital. On January 13, Mount Clemens General celebrated 50 years of service to the community. Founded in 1944 to provide obstetrical care to the citizens of Macomb County, this 288-bed osteopathic acute care facility has grown to offer many services to our community. As an educational hospital, Mount Clemens General provides quality medical training to physicians and staff. Mount Clemens General has an excellent emergency care center as well as a comprehensive cardiac care center. Rehabilitation, community education, pharmacy, and home health care services coupled with physician training clinics all demonstrate the hospital's commitment to providing quality health care in our community. Mount Clemens General has also provided Macomb County with several medical firsts. In addition to the Mat Gaberty Heart Institute, the Easy Street rehabilitation environment, begun in 1987, was the first of its type in the midwest. The dedication and professionalism have earned the hospital respect and recognition and I applaud those whose efforts have made Mount Clemens General a world class medical facility. On the occasion of the hospital's 50th anniversary, I am pleased to pay tribute to Mount Clemens General Hospital. I ask that my colleagues join me in saluting a valued service in my home community as they prepare for their next 50 years of service. ____________________
 
The speaker is ANDREWS and he says  of Texas. Speaker, this new year had hardly begun before the alarming tallies of 1993's crimes and homicides began rolling in. It is no wonder that Americans are gripped by a fear of crime and violent attack more real than at any other time in our history. Since 1983, we have witnessed a nearly 20 percent jump in crime. In the past year, 1 in 13 Americans was a victim of murder, rape, or other violent attack. Combatting our country's crime problem has been frustrating, largely because we have been hesitant to commit the necessary resources to lock these felons up and keep them there. If we are ever to end the skyrocketing crime, we must end the parole of violent and repeat offenders and help States build the prisons to house them. The reasons are glaringly obvious. Of the 13 million arrests police make in a year, less than 2 percent result in a prison sentence. Less than one in six murders a year results in incarceration. It has gotten so bad that the expected punishment for committing a serious crime now averages about 22 months. The problem is too many of these criminals are serving their time on our streets and not a prison cell. My home State of Texas, right now, has nearly 420,000 convicts on either probation or parole, after serving an average of only 2.4 years--21 percent--of their prison sentences. Experts predict that a criminal serving only 4 years of a 10-year sentence will commit approximately 70 more crimes during his unserved time. Those are sobering figures, especially when two-thirds of the violent crime is committed by repeat offenders who have at least five previous arrests. In Texas, for example, nearly half--47 percent--of violent crimes are committed by repeat offenders. Clearly we must change that record. If we are ever to stem the rising tide of violence and crime we must get dead serious in locking up violent and repeat offenders for their full prison time. That is why I am introducing the Violent and Repeat Offenders Act of 1994, which seeks to get rid of parole for violent and repeat offenders and help States double the amount of prison space in this country. The act provides nearly $50 billion in Federal grants from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Assistance [BJA] to States to build and operate more prisons, with the goal of doubling total Federal and State prison space to 2 million beds. To be eligible for these grants, States must eliminate parole for violent and repeat offenders. At the same time, the bill also eliminates Federal warden discretion for supervised release of Federal convicts. In essence, these Federal grants will cut nearly in half the States' costs for building and operating prisons, while creating space where violent and career felons can serve their full sentences. Previous proposals, like the crime bill passed by the U.S. Senate, would create a national network of Federal prisons to house the States' excess prison populations. This nationalization of our correctional facilities would be needlessly inefficient and result in the Federal Government infringing upon the States' jurisdiction over their correctional systems. In addition, my bill targets the career criminals currently preying on our neighborhoods. It authorizes the BJA to give grants to help law enforcement arrest and prosecute repeat offenders and parole violators. It also establishes a nationwide computer data base of criminal arrest histories of major offenders and other relevant information for apprehension of parole offenders. It further eliminates the double victimization of society by denying Federal benefits to third-time felons. Beyond the security for our citizenry, locking up career criminals saves money. A recent study shows that the over 2 million violent crimes committed each year cost victims $170 billion. When added with the other costs of crime, such as criminal trials, property loss, increased police and private protection, the total cost of violent and property crime in America is a staggering $425 billion a year. With the average cost of housing a criminal at about $27,000 a year, the cost of keeping these criminals in prison is far less than letting them back out on the streets. The madness that puts revolving doors on our prisons must stop. How can we continue to allow some violent criminal the freedom to commit barbarous acts repeatedly, then put that same criminal back on the streets within days? Clearly we need to act now to make sure that these career criminals serve time for their crime. ____________________
 
The speaker is KOPETSKI and he says  Speaker, I rise today to note the passing of an exemplary citizen from my home State of Oregon. in an age when some in this country are divisive and self-centered, it is truly a pleasure to recognize an individual whose life was centered on the principle of service to others--to his Nation, State, and community. Reed Adelbert Gallier was such a person. Born on July 5, 1922, and growing up in Bandon, he came to love the Oregon coast. After attending the Hill Military Academy in Portland, Reed attended the Evanston Collegiate Institute in Evanston, IL. He returned home to Oregon and attended Lewis and Clark College in Portland. The Second World War interrupted Reed's education. When Pearl Harbor was attacked, Reed answered his Nation's call. Putting service to his country above personal ambition. Reed enlisted in the U.S. Army and saw action as an infantryman in both Italy and North Africa. Following his honorable discharge from the military, Reed again attended Lewis and Clark College. Reed then reenlisted in the Army and completed a 20-year career. His service took him to both Korea and Japan. At one point in his military career, Reed served on the University of Oregon's military staff. Following Reed's military retirement, he went to work for the Oregon Department of Veterans' Affairs in 1965. As a veteran, Reed felt a special kinship with those he assisted. Filing a variety of positions within the Department, Reed served in central Oregon as well as on his beloved south coast. He retired from the agency in 1984, having completed his second 20 year career. Reed then focused his attention on community service, and served on the city of Bandon Planning Commission. Subsequently, he was appointed to the Bandon City Council. Serving for 10 years 4 as council president, Reed dealt with a variety of complex issues affecting the livability of his cherished community. In addition to his duties on the council. Reed was an active participant in civic organizations and his local church. In early 1992, Reed was appointed by Oregon's Governor to serve on the advisory committee to the director of the Oregon Department of Veterans' Affairs. Once again, Reed served with distinction in a demanding position. As a voice for veterans throughout Oregon, Reed played an active role in the effort to secure an Oregon State Veterans' home. Speaker, Reed Gallier is no longer with us, but his legacy of service endures. Let us honor his passing by rededicating ourselves to the principle of service to others. We owe him no less. ____________________
 
The speaker is COPPERSMITH and he says  Speaker, I rise in support of H.R. 3583, a bill to make certain non-Federal levees eligible for assistance under the Federal Levee Rehabilitation Program, and want the record to reflect my understanding of the purpose and intent of this legislation. To qualify for assistance under H.R. 3583, a non-Federal levee must meet Army Corps of Engineers criteria for operation, maintenance, and design. Furthermore, the levee must meet economic justifications and have a public sponsor. In short, the bill does not seek to breach existing law governing levee rehabilitation. Under this bill, before qualifying for Federal repair funds, a levee must meet all substantive Corps requirements for the existing rehabilitation program. This bill will provide repair funds only to levees with minor non-material compliance problems, such as a failure to submit paperwork several years ago. Moreover, the public sponsors shall demonstrate sufficient financial resources to ensure that proper maintenance of the non-Federal levee will continue. In addition, H.R. 3583 in no way conflicts with the administration's August 23 memorandum to the Corps and other relevant agencies instructing them to consider non-structural alternatives and design modifications that could provide greater local benefits of flood control, reduction of future potential flood damage to the public sponsor, as well as to adjacent areas upstream and downstream, lower long-term costs to the Federal Government, and natural resource protection. As this legislation allows consideration of the future risk of failure, projected relief costs, and consideration of alternatives, and in no way conflicts with the August 23 memorandum, I am pleased to support H.R. 3583. Finally, I salute the hard work by Representative Danner, as well as Representative Boehlert, Chairman Applegate, ranking member Shuster and Chairman Mineta in crafting this important and balanced legislation. ____________________
 
The speaker is MEEK and he says  Speaker, Detective Kathleen Ruggiero of the North Miami Police Department was recently selected as 1993 Officer of the Year. I am certain you will agree with me that Detective Ruggiero is a fitting choice, for she is truly an asset to our community. Kathleen Ruggiero is a caring person of extraordinary energy. On the job, she singlehandedly runs the North Miami Juvenile Crime Unit. Off the job, she has raised 24 foster children, plus 6 of her own. And she also finds time to volunteer at more than a half dozen community service organizations, such as the Haitian Refugee Center and the Special Olympics. The city of North Miami is fortunate to have such excellent officers on its police force. I want to share with my colleagues an article about Detective Ruggiero that appeared in the Miami Herald. The article follows: [From the Miami Herald, Sunday, Jan. 9, 1994] Top Officer Noted for Caring--First Woman To Win North Miami Police Annual Award (By Olympia Duhart) And you thought you were busy. Kathleen Ruggiero, a detective with the North Miami Police Department, runs a juvenile unit single-handedly, volunteers at more than half a dozen service organizations, feeds the hungry, gives clothes to the needy and has raised 24 foster children, plus six children of her own. And she still finds time to dote on her three grandchildren. ``I just feel that when you want to do things, you always make the time,'' says Ruggiero, 45. ``You put things in a priority category.'' All that hard work has paid off. Last week, Ruggiero was named 1993 Officer of the Year for the North Miami Police Department. It's the first time the department has named a woman for the award. ``She's continuously demonstrated a love for the job and a love for society,'' says North Miami Police Chief Kenneth Each. ``Where she gets the time to do it, I don't know.'' Ruggiero, with the department for eight years, will be presented with the Officer of the Year award Jan. 26 during a luncheon at the Miami Shores Country Club. Nominating members say Ruggiero was an easy choice because of her extraordinary concern for children. Since last May, she has been the sole officer in the department's Juvenile Crimes Unit. In that post, she investigates more than 160 cases, from lost children to domestic disputes to sexual batteries. Ruggiero's concern for children doesn't stop at the office. There are the 24 foster children she has raised, in addition to her own, and she's known throughout the city for her extensive charity work. On Christmas Eve, Ruggiero played the role of real-life Santa to more than 300 needy families, delivering donated toys to children. She also distributed more than 250 food baskets to families at Thanksgiving. Ruggiero volunteers time to too many organizations to list. They include the Haitian Refugee Center, Save the Shoreline, Battered Women and the Special Olympics. Ruggiero says helping other people is the main reason she was attracted to police work. ``I really thought I could make a difference,'' Ruggiero says. ``I just try to help other people because I've been blessed with so much.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is KLEIN and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to Michael D. Nardiello, a man who has given instruction and counsel to thousands of students in the community of Belleville, NJ. I am very proud to join the Belleville School District in thanking him for his 42 years of service. Nardiello received his B.A. from Montclair State College and graduated in 1950. In addition, he attended Seton Hall University where he received his M.A. in special education. Immediately after leaving Montclair State, Nardiello began his lifelong commitment to Belleville. In 1951, he became a teacher in school No. 4, and he was later named the supervisor of special education. In 1968, he became the principal of school No. 4. Nardiello continued his dedication to Belleville throughout his career. In 1980, he was named the assistant superintendent for school personnel. Three years later, he became the superintendent of schools until his retirement 10 years later in December 1993. For decades, Belleville has benefited from the positive influence Nardiello has provided to students, parents, and teachers, and I know he will be deeply missed. For his valued effort, I join with my colleagues in wishing him many more wonderful years and continued success. ____________________
 
The speaker is WHEAT and he says  Speaker, I rise to add my strong support to the Frank- Shays amendment and to urge my colleagues to vote for this responsible effort to significantly cut Federal spending. I commend Frank and Shays for their leadership, and I'm proud to be involved in efforts to move this legislation forward. Speaker, our constituents are demanding that we end wasteful and unnecessary spending. They are demanding that we reinvent our spending priorities as we reinvent government. The Frank-Shays amendment answers that call. Each of the provisions contained in this amendment have been considered by the House in the recent past. Each has been reviewed by relevant committees and subcommittees. Each has been debated. Each has been voted on. Everything here has appropriately gone through the normal legislative process. Some of the provisions have been approved by this body, none has received less than 200 votes. Speaker, there is nothing new here. Except that today, we are asking the House to consider these reforms together--at one time and in one package--with the goal of substantially reducing our national deficit. The Frank-Shays amendment takes a responsible approach toward real deficit reduction--without undermining the promise of national health care reform, without imposing billions of dollars in unfunded mandates to States, without cutting back on vital health care research, without denying critically needed assistance to the young and the elderly. The Frank-Shays amendment acknowledges that in this post-cold war era, we must take serious steps toward burden-sharing. This amendment sends a clear and overdue message to our wealthy Western European allies: The American people are fed up with picking up your tab. Our wealthy allies simply must begin to pay their fair share of U.S. defense costs abroad. This amendment goes beyond the rhetoric and ends the free ride for our friends who can well afford to pay their own way. The amendment also recognizes that we must stop spending billions of dollars for big-ticket items like the space station which we either do not need or cannot afford. Speaker, together with the cuts already proposed, the Frank-Shays amendment will reduce spending by over $51 billion in the next 4 years. It does so without any budgetary grandstanding, and without stealing from the account that we have set aside for national health care reform. The Frank-Shays amendment is a responsible continuation of our earlier efforts to achieve true deficit reduction, and I urge my colleagues to support this important amendment. ____________________
 
The speaker is MOLINARI and he says  Speaker, on Tuesday, January 25, 1994, a special event will take place in my district. The Cathedral Club of Brooklyn, NY, will gather to honor Robert C. Golden for his commitment to voluntary service. It is my pleasure to have this opportunity to thank him for his tireless efforts on behalf of the entire Brooklyn community. Golden was born on July 12, 1946. He grew up and was educated in New York, ultimately earning a MBA in finance from Fordham University. An active professional as well as an active volunteer, he presently works for Prudential Securities, Inc. as an executive vice president and director of operations. Golden is involved in numerous activities and has received many awards and honors for his endeavors. Please allow me to describe just a few. He is currently active in the Cathedral Club of Brooklyn and was its president from 1981 until 1982. The club raises funds to support the diocese of Brooklyn and its efforts in helping the needy. He was also a past president of the Bayfort Benevolent Association. This group of local community residents works to raise money for needy people during the holiday season. In addition to packing food baskets for hungry families, they also raise money to help purchase toys for children at Christmas or help needy families with the payment of bills. Families without heat or electricity during the winter have always been major concerns of the Bayfort Benevolent Association. As a result, some of the funds raised have also gone to remedy this situation. As a member of the board of governors and chairman of development for Heartshare Human Services of New York, Golden has raised over $1 million for the agency to further its mission of aiding and facilitating adoptions and foster care placements. His wife Maureen, his daughter Kathleen, and his son Robert have undoubtedly been an inspiration to him. Speaker, many of the problems we face today could be solved if more individuals like Robert Golden would get involved. For this reason, I am happy for the occasion to show my appreciation to one such person. I applaud Robert C. Golden on his selfless years of service and thank him for his dedication to bettering lives in Brooklyn. ____________________
 
The speaker is RICHARDSON and he says  Speaker, a powerful voice in my home State's largest city, Albuquerque, will be silenced at month's end. I am sorry to report that local talk show host Terry Leedom is being pulled off the air. It's not that KKOB-AM radio management is unhappy with Leedom's popular late night talk show. In fact, I'm told Terry is well liked. It seems the problem is economics--it is cheaper for the station to run a nationally syndicated talk radio show than pay Leedom a salary. Terry has done a great service in New Mexico by delving into controversial local issues--something nationally syndicated talk shows simply can't do. I viewed KKOB's airing of Terry's show more than just a commercial venture, but a real public service. With Terry's February 1 departure, there will be a vacuum on Albuquerque's airwaves of public debate and discourse of local issues in Albuquerque. On behalf of Terry's many faithful listeners, it is my hope Terry will find a new home on Albuquerque airwaves soon so that we can once again debate, argue and disagree over local issues so important to the future of Albuquerque and New Mexico. ____________________
 
The speaker is VISCLOSKY and he says  Speaker, it is with great honor that I rise today to commend William ``Teeny'' Kranz for his extensive contributions to the First Congressional District of Indiana. Teeny is the 1993 recipient of the prestigious ``Sagamore of the Wabash'' award, conferred by Indiana Governor Evan Bayh. The ``Sagamore of the Wabash'' is the highest honor the Governor of Indiana can bestow on an Indiana resident, and it is a personal tribute given to those who have rendered a distinguished service to the State. The term ``Sagamore'' was used by the American Indian Tribes of the Northeastern United States to describe a man of great wisdom to whom the chief would look for guidance and advice. Indicative of true leadership, the ``Sagamore'' award is reserved for individuals who have made lifetime commitments to preserving the pride in Hoosier heritage among the citizens of Indiana. The youngest of 18 children, Teeny was born in a log cabin in Clinton, IN on July 14, 1912. He began his career with U.S. Steel's Gary Works in 1929, and he retired from Gary Works in 1976. For 16 of those 47 years, Teeny was president of the United Steelworkers of America, Local Union 1066. During his tenure as president, his union brethren came to depend upon him. Teeny represented those victimized by unfairness or misfortune, and employed every effort above and beyond the call of duty to assist them. A Navy veteran and a amateur boxer, Teeny's extraordinary career has not ended with his retirement. Teeny is currently the president of the Northwest Indiana Retiree's Club, which has recently grown into an association consisting of more than 500 members. A group organized by Teeny himself, members participate in social functions, fund-raisers, and community services. Teeny has earned the respect and admiration of generations of steelworkers, and through his determination and hard work, has become a leader not only among the United Steelworkers of America, but also throughout the entire Calumet region. I call upon my colleagues to join me in wishing Teeny a most rewarding retirement and continued success in his future endeavors. ____________________
 
The speaker is PARKER and he says  Speaker, today I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring a group of outstanding young men, the Parklane Academy Pioneer football squad of McComb, MS, and their coaches, supporters, fans, and parents on winning the school's fourth Class 3A Mississippi Private School Football Championship. The Pioneers on November 20, 1993, defeated the Pillow Academy Mustangs of Greenwood, MS, in a resounding 35-3 victory. I commend the players on both teams for their courage and sportsmanship and fans on both sides of the gridiron for their devotion to these young men, their schools, and the sport of football. Turning the team around from last year's 4-6 record, the Pioneers' quest for the crown this season was hindered by only two losses, one of which was a 16-0 loss to Pillow Academy during the regular season. The Mustangs had achieved a remarkable 12-0 season, making Pillow Academy the favorite in the championship game. However, the Pioneers dominated the Mustangs in all aspects of the game, playing almost error-free and taking home the title. One cannot applaud the players without praising their supporters. I commend the fans for their unwavering pride and spirit. I salute the parents for supporting and encouraging their children and taking the responsibility of ensuring the players, cheerleaders, band members, and student volunteers are able to attend each practice and game. I praise the coaches and teachers for their positive leadership, understanding, and guidance in this championship and in their efforts to help all students earn academic achievement. The Pioneers exemplify the American spirit of competition, fair play, and pride. I ask you to join me in saluting the Parklane Pioneers for their dedication, positive attitude, and pride. ____________________
 
The speaker is MALONEY and he says  Speaker, I rise today to bring to the attention of my colleagues the tremendous achievements of the Rev. Dr. Herbert B. Anderson. Dr. Anderson was installed as senior pastor of the Brick Presbyterian Church in the city of New York at a special convocation held on November 5, 1978. During the eventful succeeding period of 15 years, the pastorate of this cultivated Christian gentleman has been marked by a new spirit of community within the church, and a growing pattern of regeneration in the spiritual and secular affairs of the congregation. This is evidenced by a broad-based increase in church membership and stewardship, the growth of the church school and the day school, an abiding regard for the tradition of fine church music at Brick, an enhanced and more effective program of outreach to the areas of concern to the Brick Church in neighboring parts of our city, as well as the restoration and improvement of the church's physical properties. The past 15 years have also seen a significant increase in the Brick Church's endowment funds, the renewal of its commitment to serve others, and a continuing involvement in the affairs of their denomination at the local and national levels. All of these culminated in the last year's joyful celebration of the 225th anniversary to which, as ever, Dr. Anderson so felicitously devoted his time, talents, and enthusiasm. Throughout the period of his ministry at Brick, Dr. Anderson has reflected credit upon himself and the church by his participation in the affairs of the denomination and the community, including notable service as the first chair of the board of trustees of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) Foundation, as chair of the committee organizing the bicentennial celebration of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), as chair of the board of trustees of McCormick Theological Seminary and as a trustee of Union Theological Seminary, Warren Wilson College, and Auburn Theological Seminary. Because the efforts of Dr. and Anderson on behalf of the church have been so unstinting, because their affection and consideration for the church have been so enduring, and the fruits of their labors for the church have been so extraordinary, I would like my colleagues to join me in saluting Dr. and Anderson for their 15 years of service to the Brick Presbyterian Church of New York and the entire community. ____________________
 
The speaker is SOLOMON and he says  Speaker, every year in the rural and suburban regions of New York State alone, volunteer firemen save countless lives and billions of dollars in property. That's why I'd like to say a few words today about George S. Burch, who will be celebrating 50 years of volunteer firefighting in Cambridge, NY on February 6. George Burch joined the Cambridge Volunteer Fire Department on January 26, 1944. He was department chief from 1955 to 1957. He also served as the Washington County deputy fire coordinator from 1970 to 1991, and on the Fire Advisory Board from 1958 to 1993. I'll admit to having a soft spot in my heart for volunteer firemen, since I was one myself for 20 years. I know the sacrifice they make to protect the lives and property of their neighbors. I've watched these volunteer fire companies update their training and equipment, but the bottom line has always been the dedication of the individual firefighter. As far as I'm concerned, there's nothing more all-American than our volunteer fire companies, and few more admirable citizens than those like George Burch, who have been so generous with their time. Speaker, I ask this body to rise with me to salute a great American, 50-year firefighter George S. Burch of Cambridge, NY. ____________________
 
The speaker is CLAYTON and he says  Speaker, on the occasion of his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, I wish to recognize Chief M. Sgt. Alden R. Hargett for his 30 years of dedicated service to our country. In his most recent assignment as chief of the Information Management Branch, Inquiry Division, Office of Legislative Liaison, Chief Hargett provided an invaluable service to every member of Congress. Having demonstrated superior leadership, initiative, and strong management abilities, he was personally selected to manage the overall operation of the Information Management Branch which processes all Presidential, Vice Presidential, and congressional correspondence for the Secretary of the Air Force and the Air Force Chief of Staff. There he managed the accountability of all inquiries referred to the Department of the Air Force as well as serving as the Freedom of Information Act manager for the Air Force Office of Legislative Liaison. Best-in-the-business credentials and his widely recognized credibility within the information management community mandated his selection to serve on several headquarters level quality management teams as the information management representative. He personally conducted the requirements definition and source selection studies resulting in the installation of a state-of-the-art document imaging system for legislation liaison. So thorough was this effort, it became the example for other agencies to follow as they undertook modernization of their information management functions. His contributions during this tour will have a positive impact on legislative liaison long after his departure. Born in Cove City, NC, Chief Hargett graduated from Newbold High School in 1961. He has an applied science degree from the Community College of the Air Force and has continued to pursue his baccalaureate degree through Central Texas College, the College of the Air Force, Wayne Community College, and the Eastern Washington State University. He is currently attending the University of Maryland. Chief Hargett entered the Air Force from the U.S. Army Active Reserves in March 1966. Significant assignments have included tours in France, Korea, and Alaska. Assignments also have been in North Carolina, Texas, and the DC area, including three Pentagon tours. The chief is married to the former Dorothy L. Dawson of Vanceboro, NC. They have two daughters, Deborah, an attorney, and Regina, a captain in the Air Force. I want to join his fellow service members in commending Chief Hargett on an exemplary service career and wish him every success in civilian life. ____________________
 
The speaker is REED and he says  Speaker, I rise today to salute a distinguished young man from Rhode Island who has attained the rank of Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America. He is Steven St. Pierre of Troop 11, in Coventry, and he was honored last week for his noteworthy achievement. Not every young American who joins the Boy Scouts earns the prestigious Eagle Scout Award. In fact, only 2.5 percent of all Boy Scouts do. To earn the award, a Boy Scout must fulfill requirements in the areas of leadership, service, and outdoor skills, He must earn 21 merit badges, 11 of which are required from areas such as citizenship in the community, citizenship in the Nation, citizenship in the world, safety, environmental science, and first aid. As he progresses through the Boy Scout ranks, a Scout must demonstrate participation in increasingly more responsible service projects. He must also demonstrate leadership skills by holding one or more specific youth leadership positions in his patrol and/or troop. Jim has distinguished himself in accordance with each of these creteria. For his Eagle Scout project, Steven completed a much needed landscaping project of the surrounding property of the Coventry Town Hall/Library complex. This extensive project included the leveling of unnecessary barriers and the spreading of truckloads of mulch to improve the look of the complex. Speaker, I ask you and my colleagues to join me in saluting Eagle Scout Steve St. Pierre. In turn, we must duly recognize the Boy Scouts of America for establishing the Eagle Scout Award and the strenuous criteria its aspirants must meet. This program has, through its 80 years, honed and enhanced the leadership skills and commitment to public service of many outstanding Americans, two dozen of whom now serve in the House. It is my sincere belief that Steve St. Pierre will continue his public service and in so doing will further distinguish himself and consequently better his community. I am proud that Jim undertook his Scout activity in my representative district, and I join friends, colleagues, and family who salute him. ____________________
 
The speaker is WHEAT and he says  Speaker, I rise today to congratulate Major League Baseball on a new initiative to honor the Negro Leagues which, in a segregated America, provided young African-American athletes with a chance to realize their dreams of playing professional baseball. Major League Baseball has decided to add Negro Leagues merchandise to their catalog and donate the profits from sales of those items to the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum in Kansas City, the Jackie Robinson Foundation and the 125 former Negro Leagues players who are still living. This altruistic gesture should be applauded, Speaker, for not only does it benefit today's philanthropy, it reminds the baseball fan of tomorrow of the remarkable sportsmanship of America's other professional baseball league. I would like to share with my colleagues an article that describes Major League Baseball's efforts to properly memorialize the Negro Leagues. [From USA Today, Nov. 12, 1993] Merchandise to Benefit Negro League Players (By Ben Brown) Major League Baseball will announce Friday that it plans to expand its catalog of licensed merchandise with the addition of a Negro Leagues line. Profits from the sale of the apparel, gifts and novelties will go to the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, the Jackie Robinson Foundation and some 125 living veterans of the Negro Leagues. Richard E. White, president of Major League Baseball Properties, estimates the total royalty payments to rise to $1 million a year within five years. ``And this is absolutely 100% pro bono on the part of Major League Baseball,'' says White. ``Each year we'll publicly disclose all our collections and disbursements so there's no doubt Major League Baseball is doing the right thing.'' Buck O'Neil, a former Negro Leagues star and now chairman of the Negro Leagues museum in Kansas City, Mo., says the deal ``is one of the best things that could happen.'' Says White: ``We can't reverse history (when the Negro Leagues were the only home for pro black players). But next year is the 125th anniversary of pro baseball, and we want this new partnership to become a very inclusive part of that celebration.'' The first product in the line will be introduced in January. ____________________
 
The speaker is RAMSTAD and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay special tribute to Tom Mullon, a resident of my district who is retiring after a highly distinguished career with the Department of Veterans Affairs [VA]. Tom has served the VA for more than 30 years. During that time, he has deeply influenced the course the VA has taken in the Midwest. Since joining the VA in 1962, Tom has occupied many responsible positions, including that of VA Regional Director for the Midwestern Region. The capstone of his career was overseeing the planning, construction, activation, and opening of the Minneapolis VA Medical Center [VAMC], a $240 million construction project which gave the Midwest a truly premier facility in the VA hospital system. Tom was the driving force behind the establishment of the Brain Sciences Center, a research facility housed at the Minneapolis VAMC. Additionally, Tom was responsible for the opening of numerous clinics and health centers, proving himself a true friend and advocate of veterans. Even though Tom is retiring from the VA, I am sure he will continue to contribute to the VA and the veterans community through his tireless efforts on the various councils, task forces, and numerous other projects on which he works. Speaker, I highly commend Mullon for his efforts in the VA and his influence on the communities in the Midwest, and truly which him all the best in all his future endeavors. ____________________
 
The speaker is EDWARDS and he says  of California. Speaker, as we return to Congress and prepare to consider welfare reform and job training legislation, it is imperative that we take another look at what will work best to break the inherent cycle of poverty facing our Nation. As our industries continue to change, high school dropout rates remain high, and the number of impoverished Americans increases, we here in Congress have a responsibility to enact public policy that confronts these problems. The Center for Employment Training [CET], founded 27 years ago in my San Jose district, has taken a nontraditional approach that deserves careful examination. CET's training curriculum emphasizes the development of hands-on vocational skills while simultaneously integrating basic reading, math, and communication skills. Several studies have found that the CET model is not only cost effective, but extremely successful at meeting its program goals of significantly increasing employment and earnings for its graduates. Recently, the San Jose Mercury News had an interesting editorial seeking further Federal investment in CET-model programs. I'm sure our colleagues will find much food for thought in this editorial, which I am pleased to enter into the Record. The article follows: [From the San Jose Mercury News, Jan. 6, 1994] Job Training That Works--Standout San Jose Program Deserves More Funding What does San Jose have that was invented in a garage, and has people in 48 U.S. cities, Chile, Belize and Mexico standing in line for? If you guessed personal computers, you're wrong. The answer is a spot in a job program run by or supervised by the Center for Employment Training. CET began 26 years ago in East San Jose with an unorthodox approach to the elusive goal of turning welfare recipients into workers. Instead of offering popular and easy remedial English and math classes, CET stresses tangible skills. No matter how well men or women read and write, they quickly get their hands on typewriters, circuit boards, kitchen ovens and machine tools. It works. When the Manpower Demonstration Research Corp. in New York measured 15 training programs for disadvantaged high school dropouts, CET received the only passing grade. CET graduates saw their earnings increase $6,700 over four years, far above the average of $214. Two years ago the Rockefeller Foundation called CET's success with young mothers a national model. It Really works. The government of Chile has formally invited CET to start a center. Belize already has one. Mexican government officials have visited CET's headquarters and training center in San Jose. The Clinton administration has awarded CET $1 million to replicate its method in 10 new cities. CET already operates centers in 28 cities coast to coast and has placed 60,000 graduates. So why just a measly $1 million more from Washington? In a quarter century, CET has outperformed a legion of federally funded job-training programs that squandered billions. As the Clinton welfare reformers prepare their initiatives, it's clear Washington must cut loose the failed approaches and reward the one that succeed. CET is one of the nation's very few standouts. ____________________
 
The speaker is HAMILTON and he says  Speaker, on December 16, 1993, I wrote to the Secretary of State regarding the disappearance of Mansur Kikhia, a Libyan exile and human rights activist, who was abducted in Cairo, Egypt last December while attending the annual meeting of the Arab Organization for Human Rights. to date, Kikhia's captors have not been identified and his whereabouts are unknown. It is suspected, however, that the Libyan Government may have played a role in Kikhia's disappearance. I would like to bring the text of my letter and the Department of State's response to it to the attention of my colleagues. The text of the letters follows. Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Washington, DC, December 16, 1993. Hon. Warren Christopher, Secretary of State, Department of State Washington, DC. Dear Secretary: An influential member of the political opposition movement against the regime of Colonel Qaddafi of Libya, Mansur R. Kikhia, is believed to have been abducted last Friday, December 10, from his room at the Al Safir Hotel in Cairo while attending the annual meeting of the Arab Organization for Human Rights. Although the current fate of Kikhia is unknown, associates and leaders of groups opposed to Qaddafi believe that Kikhia was abducted by Egyptian authorities prior to being handed over to Libyan authorities because of his outspoken opposition to the current Libyan regime. Similar abductions from Egypt of Libyan nationals opposed to Colonel Qaddafi have occurred in the past. Kikhia has resided in the U.S. since 1990 as a permanent resident. His wife and four children are citizens of the United States. Prior to his residence in the U.S., Kikhia had been Libya's Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chairman of the Libyan mission to the United Nations. In August 1980, Kikhia resigned his post as chairman of the Libyan delegation to the U.N. and publicly protested the killing and torture of many Libyans in Libya and abroad. A recent Reuters news report states that Libya has vowed to crush all exile opponents of Colonel Qadaffi's government and appealed for the assassination of former foreign minister Abdel-Monem el-Houni. If Kikhia has been captured by Libyan authorities--and there is a great deal of circumstantial evidence to indicate that Kikhia has already been delivered into the hands of his enemies--then apparently the report is factual and Colonel Qadaffi has begun to implement this latest decree. I am greatly concerned about the kidnapping of Kikhia and the implication that Libya is launching a new round of state sponsored terrorism. I am also deeply troubled by reports that Egyptian authorities may have been involved in the abduction of Kikhia. Whatever clarification you can provide me on this matter, including the Department's efforts to learn of Kikhia's location and condition, would be greatly appreciated. With best regards, Sincerely, Lee H. Hamilton, Chairman. ____ U.S. Department of State, Washington, DC, January 12, 1994. Hon. Lee H. Hamilton, Chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives. Dear Chairman: I am pleased to respond to your letter of December 16, concerning the disappearance of Mansur Kikhya and the potential resurgence of a Libyan campaign against dissidents. The U.S. Government is deeply concerned about Kikhya's disappearance in Cairo. We remain in close contact with the highest levels of the Egyptian Government on this matter, and we are confident they appreciate the depth of our interest. Unfortunately, an extensive and ongoing Egyptian investigation has yielded no clues to Kikhya's fate thus far. The Egyptian Government assures us they will continue the investigation until our mutual questions are answered. We have no evidence linking Egypt to Kikhya's disappearance. We are also in frequent contact with Kikhya's family and the Libyan community in exile. Their fears about Kikhya's well-being are understandable, given Qadhafi's record of targeting regime opponents. Qadhafi's recent public calls for the deaths of prominent members of the Libyan opposition and invitation to notorious terrorist groups to a conference in Libya are cause for further concern. We will watch Qadhafi closely for any sign that his rhetoric is being translated into action. I hope this information has addressed your concerns. Please do not hesitate to contact us should you believe we may be of further assistance. Sincerely, Wendy R. Sherman, Assistant Secretary Legislative Affairs. ____________________
 
The speaker is JACOBS and he says  Speaker, Bob Ball, former Commissioner of Social Security, and Henry Aaron, director of economic studies at Brookings, produced a thought-provoking piece for the Washington Post, and it was published there on November 14, 1993. I insert in the Record the column. It is worthwhile reading for all Americans, I think. [From the Washington Post, Nov. 14, 1993] The Myth of Means-Testing (By Robert M. Ball and Henry J. Aaron) Everyone knows that rising social security expenditures are boosting the federal budget deficit. Right? Everyone knows that cutting social security expenditures is the key to lowering the deficit. Right? And common sense tells us that the fairest way to cut benefits would be by means-testing them so that benefits only of the well-to-do elderly are cut. Right? ``Yes, yes and yes,'' says Peter G. Peterson, president of the Concord Coalition, founded by former senators Warren B. Rudman and Paul E. Tsongas. Peterson is everywhere with his message. TV interviews galore, an Atlantic Monthly article, a new book and the Concord Coalition's September report, ``The Zero Deficit Plan.'' But in fact, the correct responses to the three statements are ``wrong, wrong and wrong again.'' Here's why: Far from increasing the deficit, social security is now reducing the deficit. In 1993 social security revenues will exceed outlays by $46 billion. If it weren't for social security, the federal deficit would be that much larger. That contribution to deficit reduction will continue to grow for many years. Without social security, the federal deficit in the year 2000 would be $97 billion larger than the already frightening $251 billion projected by the Congressional Budget Office. Falsehoods repeated often enough come to be accepted by many as true. In this fashion, the statement that rising social security costs are a major factor in pushing up the federal deficit has gained currency. But it is still false. Cutting social security benefits would almost certainly not lower the deficit. That's because any change that would increase the excess of payroll tax revenues over current benefit payments would make it virtually impossible to resist calls for cutting payroll taxes in tandem. Why, it would be asked, should even more of the proceeds from a regressive tax on earnings--justified only because it pays for a progressive benefit structure, also linked to earnings--be used to offset deficits generated by the failure to pay for other governmental operations? Last year, Congress seriously considered, and the Senate only narrowly rejected, a proposal to cut payroll taxes enough to eliminate any excess of social security revenues over expenditures. A substantial cut in benefits would surely prompt Congress to action. Of course, if Congress cut benefits and taxes in parallel, the deficit would not fall. Means-testing social security--the denial of benefits to people whose income or wealth exceeds a stipulated level-- would be unfair and undermine support for our universal pension system, by far the most effective anti-poverty program we have ever had. The social security system includes a simple but subtle principle that is very important in protecting the families of low-wage earners against poverty when such workers retire, become disabled or die. Everyone pays taxes at the same rate on earnings up to a limit, so that everyone can claim a pension in return, as a matter of right and without the stigma of welfare. But the benefit paid to low earners replaces a larger share of their past earnings than does the benefit paid to high earners. As a result, social security is keeping about 15 million people from poverty and millions more from sinking to near poverty. What makes it possible to pay benefits to workers with low earnings histories sufficient to keep them out of poverty is social security's ``weighted'' benefit formula. That formula rewards low earners more generously for each dollar of past contributions than it pays workers with high earnings histories. High earners in fact sometimes complain that they could get more privately for the taxes they and their employers pay. This claim is debatable, as social security has valuable insurance features no private pension can claim, such as complete protection against price inflation and safety from loss from business failure, industry decline or poor investment results. Still, making major reductions in the benefits of high earners and making uncertain the receipt of all but a tiny benefits, as in the Concord Coalition plan, would generate massive pressures to permit higher paid people to opt out of social security. Given the weighted benefit formula, the system could not survive if substantial numbers of higher paid earners ``opted out.'' Moreover, without such a formula, millions of elderly and disabled beneficiaries would find social security benefits to be way too low to support them and would have to turn to welfare for help. Welfare would then determine the maximum income of such households, and past contributions to social security would be meaningless for them. The succession of events arising from the introduction of a means test could well destroy the social security system, which is now of critical importance not only to the six out of 10 workers in private industry for whom social security is the only pension, but also for the vast majority of those who have a supplementary private pension built on top of social security. Social security is not intended to be just a poverty program, successful as it is at that task. It is also meant to be a base to which people can add income from pensions and savings. The United States has taken 50 years to develop a four-tier system of retirement protection, consisting of a universal and compulsory social security pension system, supplementary private and government pensions, individual savings and a safety-net--Supplemental Security Income (SSI)--that guarantees everyone some income during retirement or disability, but at a level below the poverty line. The four tiers are complementary. Changing one will force changes in the others. Means-testing social security, for example, would produce perverse effects in private pensions. Many companies with plans that guarantee pensioners a defined level of benefits are already having difficulty keeping up with funding requirements. If social security benefits were cut, or made uncertain, they would have to increase their plans' funding or announce reductions in total retirement protection for their employees. Others would drop their pension plans rather than incur added expense. Paradoxically and perversely, the biggest losers from means-testing social security might not be the intended target--the wealthy. The real losers might well be middle- income workers now fortunate enough to receive both social security and a private pension. And, of course, if social security disappeared, as well it might, the SSI welfare rolls for the elderly would grow 10 to 15 times their present size. Social security is family protection for everyone against loss of income from disability, death or retirement. It would be tragic if myopic deficit-cutters put at risk this most widely supported of federal programs through measures that would not even cut the deficit. ____________________
 
The speaker is HUGHES and he says  Speaker, the bill before the House today is a stop- gap provision to authorize pilot court-annexed arbitration for another year. The existing authorization for pilot court-annexed arbitration in the Federal System was enacted in 1988 and expired on November 19, 1993. The 1988 legislation identified 10 pilot districts for mandatory pilot programs and directed the judicial conference to identify 10 other districts for voluntary programs. Our review of these pilot programs revealed that the pilot projects in the mandatory courts were working very well and meeting their goals of: First, providing options to litigants; Second, reducing costs and time of litigation; and Third, reducing the burdens on the courts. We also determined that the mandatory programs were far more successful than the voluntary programs, and that the dollar limit for mandatory programs should be raised. The House of Representatives' response to this situation was to expand the arbitrations programs nationwide through H.R. 1102. H.R. 1102, as passed by the House of Representatives on the Suspension Calendar on October 12, 1993, directs that all district courts provide, by local rule arbitration, programs of some form. It increases the maximum amount in controversy for mandatory referral to $150,000. The Committee on the Judiciary also strongly recommends in its report that all district courts select certain categories of cases for mandatory referral. In doing so, I would say that the mandatory designation for these programs is misleading because there is a great flexibility in this mandatory process. First of all, arbitration can be used only for cases with potential money damages of under $150,000. Also, many cases are exempt from referral under the existing law, and local courts are allowed to chose those categories of cases which are most suitable for referral. Finally, and most significantly, all cases are subject to trial de novo. Given this fact, mandatory arbitration might more accurately be called nonbinding arbitration. Our Federal courts are experiencing tremendous backlogs in their civil dockets. These backlogs are adding not only delay, but expense. It behooves us to make this modest adjustment in the civil process and allow for arbitration options designed at the local level. In fact, with the difficulty of getting civil cases to trial due to the great increase in criminal dockets in the Federal Court System, H.R. 1102 might aptly be named the ``Access to Civil Justice Act.'' The other body, however, believes it needs more time to study H.R. 1102, so as an interim measure, they have passed S. 1732 to extend until December 31, 1994, the 20 pilot projects. In passing S. 1732 today, I would say that I look forward to working with Senator Heflin, Senator Grassley, and my ranking Member, Congressman Moorhead in the next session to refine H.R. 1102 so that it will provide meaningful and expedited access to civil justice. In the interim, I urge my colleagues to accept S. 1732. ____________________
 
The speaker is HORN and he says  Speaker, during the congressional recess, Secretary of Defense Les Aspin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition John Deutch announced a settlement with the McDonnell Douglas Corp. on the production of the C-17 airlifter. The C-17--or the Globemaster III--is produced by McDonnell Douglas in Long Beach CA. Under the arrangement, up to 40 C-17 aircraft will be produced at the end of the 2 years. If performance of the plane proves itself, the Defense Department has the option of requesting more planes in the future. This settlement was reached after an extensive review by the Defense Department. C-17 aircraft continue to roll off the assembly line in Long Beach. To date, four planes have been delivered to the Air Force at Charleston Air Force Base, SC, where they are undergoing field tests, and performing splendidly. The C-17 has already set 21 world records. I am confident that Congress will find the settlement reached to be fair and realistic. Having visited with the fine people in Long Beach who produce this state-of-the-art airplane, I am also confident that the C-17 will prove to be the airplane it was designed to be--the core airlifter for the armed services well into the next century. ____________________
 
The speaker is ORTIZ and he says  Speaker, I rise today to ask my colleagues to join me in commending Humberto ``Beto'' Garcia, upon the occasion of his retirement, after 35 years of exemplary service to the U.S. Customs Service. Beto began his long and illustrious career as a clerk-typist in 1959, and his meticulous attention to detail brought him to the attention of his supervisors and put him on a track that would take him through several positions of importance throughout his career, one of which was his leadership of the export control division, a tedious task that Beto handled with great skill from 1965-70. His hard work as a Custom's inspector from 1970-84 garnered him a position on the prestigious Contraband Enforcement Team [CET]. One of the duties of the members of CET was a working knowledge of the myriad of Customs regulations, so Beto threw himself into learning the regs. As a member of the CET, his accurate judgements made on the basis of Customs regulations quickly earned him the respect of his fellow team members and other Customs workers. He is so hard working and dedicated to the ethic of fairness, that Customs workers in south Texas consider him an expert in Customs regulations. If you have an unusual question about any aspect of the Customs regulations, call Beto--he'll know; or he will know which book contains the answer. During his service to the Customs Service, Beto has seen a host of changes in the Service. He has seen the same revolution we have all witnessed with the conversion from hard copy papers to computerized documents and records. He watched the drug enforcement division of Customs grow away from Customs and into the Drug Enforcement Agency [DEA]. He watched the Customs office at the Port of Brownsville grow by 75 percent. He saw the creation of Foreign Trading Zone [FTZ] Number 62 at the Port of Brownsville. In fact, Beto was instrumental in setting up the FTZ Number 62. I hope that you will all join me and Beto's family--his wife Dinah, and his daughters Lenora A. and Lorena A.--in commending Beto for his life's work in behalf of our country. ____________________
 
The speaker is STENHOLM and he says  Speaker, since 1983, the United States Congress and the German Parliament, the Bundestag, have conducted an annual exchange program in which staff members from both countries observe and learn about the workings of each other's political institutions and convey the views of Members from both sides of issues on mutual concern. This exchange program has been one of several sponsored by both public and private institutions in the United States and Germany to foster better understanding of the institutions and policies of both countries. This year will make the fourth exchange with a reunified Germany and a parliament consisting of members from both the west and the east. Ten staff members from the United States Congress will be chosen to visit Germany from April 23 to May 7. They will spend most of the time attending meetings conducted by members of the Bundestag, Bundestag party staffers, and representatives of political, business, academic, and media institutions. They also will spend a weekend in the district of a Bundestag member. A comparable delegation of German staff members will come to the United States in late June for a 3-week period. They will attend similar meetings here in Washington and will visit the districts of Members of Congress over the Fourth of July recess. The Congress-Bundestag Exchange is highly regarded in Germany. Accordingly, U.S. participants should be experienced and accomplished Hill staffers so that they can contribute to the success of the exchange on both sides of the Atlantic. The Bundestag sends senior staffers to the United States and a number of high-ranking members of the Bundestag take time to meet with the U.S. delegation. The United States endeavors to reciprocate. Applicants should have a demonstrable interest in events in Europe. Applicants need not be working in the field of foreign affairs, although such a background can be helpful. The composite United States delegation should exhibit a range of expertise in issues of mutual concern in Germany and the United States, such as, but not limited to, trade, security, the environment, immigration, economic development, health care, and other social policy issues. In addition, U.S. participants are expected to help plan and implement the program for the Bundestag staffers when they visit the United States. Among the contributions participants should expect to make is the planning of topical meetings in Washington. Moreover, participants are expected to host one or two staff people in their Member's district over the Fourth of July, or to arrange for such a visit to another Member's district. Participants will be selected by a committee composed of U.S. Information Agency personnel and past participants of the exchange. Senators and Representatives who would like a member of their staff to apply for participation in this year's program should direct them to submit a resume and cover letter only in which they state why they believe they are qualified, and some assurances of their ability to participate during the time stated. Applications may be sent to Bob Maynes or Ginger Harper, Office of Senator Dennis DeConcini, 328 Hart Building, by Tuesday, February 15. ____________________
 
The speaker is STOKES and he says  Speaker, I am proud to rise today to pay tribute to a good friend and distinguished public servant, Mayor John M. Coyne. Mayor Coyne, the chief executive of the city of Brooklyn Heights, OH, is celebrating a landmark 55 consecutive years in public service. On Friday, February 4, 1994, a host of elected officials, community leaders, family, and friends will gather to pay tribute to this outstanding individual. I am pleased to participate in this special salute to Mayor Coyne. Mayor John M. Coyne currently holds the distinguished record of being the longest serving mayor in the United States. He was elected mayor of Brooklyn, OH, in 1947. During his 47 year tenure, he has been unsuccessfully opposed four times. Prior to his election as mayor, John Coyne held a 2-year term as treasurer of the city. He was also elected and served three 2-year terms as the clerk-auditor for the city of Brooklyn. Speaker, under John Coyne's leadership, Brooklyn has grown from a small, rural village to a prosperous, thriving city. It is due to Mayor Coyne's efforts that the city of Brooklyn offers its residents an array of city services including full-time police and fire protection, emergency medical services, weekly refuse and recycling collection, senior citizen snow removal and grass cutting, and a host of municipal facilities including a city hall, community senior center, and a state- of-the-art recreation complex. John Coyne has devoted his efforts to increased safety and conservation. In 1966, Brooklyn became the home of the seat belt law when Mayor Coyne spearheaded mandatory legislation which has since been modeled around the Nation. In 1989, he authored legislation, now law, which prohibits the sale and possession of assault type weapons and provides a 7-day waiting period for weapons transactions within city limits. John Coyne has also taken a leadership role in the effort to encourage recycling. In 1990, the city of Brooklyn became the first community in the county and only the second in the State of Ohio, to institute a mandatory curbside recycling program. The program has proven successful throughout the city. I am proud to note that in addition to his duties as mayor, John Coyne has devoted his energies to strengthening the Democratic Party throughout the county and State. Since 1982, he has held the post as chairman of the Cuyahoga County Democratic Party. In this position, Mayor Coyne has served with the utmost ability, sense of fairness, and commitment. I, along with other elected officials, have benefited greatly from his strong leadership of our party, as well as his personal insight. Mayor Coyne is a member and former president of the Cuyahoga County Mayors and Managers Association. He is also a past member of the Cuyahoga County Board of Elections. Currently, Mayor Coyne serves as a member of the Ohio Mayors Association, Brooklyn Democratic Club, Southwest Council of Governments, Brooklyn Historical Society, Government Finance Officers Association, just to name a few. Speaker, Mayor John Coyne is the recipient of numerous awards for outstanding public service. He is the first recipient of the Ernest J. Bohn Award presented by the northeast Ohio chapter of the American Society for Public Administration for Outstanding Execution of Public Business. He was named ``Man of the Year'' by the Waterford Society and received the Irish Good Fellowship Club Award. Mayor Coyne was also selected as one of the first inductees into the Brooklyn High School Hall of Fame. Mayor Coyne gives credit to his wife, Jean, for giving him strength, encouragement and guidance throughout his 55 years in public service. The Coynes are the proud parents of four children--John, Ed, Penny, and Jim. They are also the proud grandparents of nine and great grandparents of three. Speaker, Mayor Coyne deserves special credit for his efforts to recognize the loyalty and dedication of black Democrats to the Cuyahoga County Democratic Party. Under his leadership, the black community made unprecedented gains in inclusion in elective office within the party structure, as well as elective office. This includes a seat on the Cuyahoga County Board of Elections, the chairmanship of the jury commission of Cuyahoga County, and jobs and judgeships. His chairmanship set an example for inclusion, affirmative action, and equal opportunity that will stand as a hallmark in Cleveland politics. I join his many supporters, family, and friends in saluting Mayor John M. Coyne. I also take this opportunity to wish him much continued success and to express my appreciation for his friendship. ____________________
 
The speaker is SHAYS and he says  Speaker, I would like to submit this article as an extension of remarks. The article was written by Jim Larkin, a constituent of mine, and appeared on the Greenwich Time's opinion page. Larkin's article, entitled, ``Finding America's Moral Bearings Before It's Too Late'', is as timely as it is poignant. He writes of the country's decaying moral fiber in areas such as business and politics. He reminisces about a time when American businesses thought about the long-run and the welfare of their employees instead of quarterly earnings--a time when Americans actually trusted the leaders they elected rather than wondering which lobbyist influenced their vote. It is my hope that my colleagues will read this article and find it as thought provoking as I did. Thank you, Speaker. [Greenwich Time, Sept. 26, 1993] Finding America's Moral Bearings Before It's Too Late By Jim Larkin Am I the only one who feels like ringing the bell of alarm when I observe such things as the continual, wholesale murder of Moslem civilians in Bosnia, while our country's leaders hold sophistic discussions, wring their hands and then go out and eat a good dinner? Is Elie Wiesel the only public figure who remembers the lessons of the Holocaust? Have we as a nation reached the point where we can rationalize anything? Can anyone who has either experienced enough years or enough pain truly believe the spin that's being put upon the chaotic events in our nation's life? They say that animals in the forest can sense an impending fire even when it is 50 miles away. They are restless and move about with no clear direction. Finally they start running. I've been on the planet going on seven decades. I arrived in what they called ``the roaring 20s,'' was raised during the Great Depression, served in World War II, got married in the 1950s, fathered four children, and will soon have my fifteenth grandchild. And I'm worried. No, I won't sugar-coat it, I'm terrified. For openers, most Americans seem to be numbed and have no clear sense of what's right and wrong. They wait for the nightly news to interpret the days events and parade the ``experts'' who ``know'' the answers. What used to be interesting conversation has been replaced by cliches copied from one form of media or the other. Ask yourself, when was the last time you heard or even uttered a truly original thought. Don't ask me where the trolley left the tracks. Like many of you, I was too busy trying to earn a living to notice the exact month or year. On the other hand, it probably was a process, like everything else. If enough inept, illegal or immoral things happen, then even a gift from the heavens like America will eventually grind to a halt. Just so you don't think this premise is based on nothing, here are some examples whereof I speak: On economics, many of our nation's premier business organizations appear to have lost their sense of mission. To this observer they seem to be compulsively striving to do just one thing; make sure their quarterly earnings meet original projections and please the financial community. Never mind where the corporation will be in 10 years' time or what unique contribution they will be making to improve our lives in the future. The management is focused on the current quarter. The future will be somebody else's problem. The main casualties of this effort are people. There is a whole new series of words that companies use when they announce the departure of their former workers. We all know them originally in more honest times it was being fired or laid-off, then later it became ``de-hiring'' or ``out- placement.'' After a while, ``down-sizing'' became popular, and finally when the need for justification became overwhelming, ``right-sizing''. In a world of avoiding the truth, language is usually the first victim. And what about those that are left behind worrying about the arrival of their pink slip? Will they ever trust management again? That leads us to No. 2: politics. Recent polls show that only about 20 percent of the American people have trust in our national political leadership. This figure is down from somewhere in the 60 percent range 30 short years ago. Can a nation endure where the level of confidence in our leadership is this low? What has caused this? Few if any of our politicians are considered real ``statesmen'' and put the country's interest over their own. They enjoy the power they have, but avoid the responsibility that goes with it. They allow themselves to be targets of seduction for the myriad of lobbyists seeking their favor. For example, every foreign nation of importance spends millions of dollars annually to make sure they get what they want from Washington. Much of the legwork for them is done by former senators, congressmen, Cabinet officers, military and naval personnel, etc. If those inside the Washington Beltway aren't shocked by this behavior, the rest of the country is. Sometimes I think the main difference between ``them'' and ``us'', is that we can still be shocked. Now to morality, the biggest pile in the stable. Sadly, our age has no Emerson. And if we did, he probably couldn't get the attention of the media. The message would sound ``strange.'' We have no one to hold our feet to the fire, to encourage us to our best, teach us to confront life with all its temptations, difficulties and disappointments, and still have the credibility to say, ``No matter, my brothers and sisters, we must choose the right.'' We are told that in our times moral things are too complex to make definitive judgments about, or morality is a subjective thing on which ``reasonable'' people may disagree. What happened to the moral certainties, the touchstones of 30 years ago and before? Were they all the products of dumb people with inferior minds? Or is morality something that is changed by each generation? Examples of immorality in our beloved land are so numerous. This fall, one of the television networks is bringing to prime time a graphic display of violence and sexual intercourse, with its attending predictable dialogue. The producer's explanation is that ``it's about time the real world is let into America's living rooms.'' The ``right'' to do this, he claims, we granted in the Constitution more than 200 years ago. Now, I wasn't there in Philadelphia in the 1780s, but the books I read in college about that seminal event made no mention of a spirited defense for pornography by any of the Founding Fathers. The second example is just a statistic. Since Roe vs. Wade, the nation has seen more than 30 million legal abortions. Without trying to deal with the ``Choice'' vs. ``Life'' issue, are any of you curious about what those babies might have brought to our nation? Many of them would now be in high school, or college, or in their first job. Do you feel any sense of loss that they are not among us? When I was in my junior year of high school, we were discussing the fall of Rome, and the class was curious about how and why this could happen to the powerful Roman Empire. I can remember asking, ``Couldn't the Roman people see it coming? see the danger they were in?'' The teacher's answer was simple, ``The Romans were an arrogant, morally corrupt people. It probably never occurred to them what could happen.'' I hope future generations won't say the same things about those of us who are here today. ____________________
 
The speaker is KILDEE and he says  Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to express my personal gratitude to all of the pages who have served so diligently in the House of Representatives during the 103d Congress. We all recognize the important role that congressional pages play in helping the House of Representatives operate. This group of young people, who come from all across our Nation, represent what is good about our country. To become a page, these young people have proven themselves to be academically qualified. They have ventured away from the security of their homes and families to spend time in an unfamiliar city. Through this experience, they have witnessed a new culture, made new friends, and learned the details of how our Government operates. As we all know, the job of a congressional page is not an easy one. Along with being away from home, the pages must possess the maturity to balance competing demands for their time and energy. In addition, they must have the dedication to work long hours and the ability to interact with people at a personal level. At the same time, they face a challenging academic schedule of classes in the House Page School. The fall 1993 class of pages witnessed many important and historical events and debates, including the North American Free-Trade Agreement, the Brady bill, and President Clinton's address to Congress and the Nation on his health care reform proposal. The pages also witnessed the ceremonies commemorating the return of the Statue of Freedom to the Capitol dome. I am sure they will consider their time spent in Washington, DC to be one of the most valuable and exciting experiences of their lives, and that with this experience they will all move ahead to lead successful and productive lives. Speaker, as Chairman of the House Page Board, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this group of distinguished young Americans. They certainly will be missed: Departing Pages: Fall 1993-94 Yoeli Barag Brian Brookshire Justin Brown Christopher Carmody Kit Cavender Carolyn Cavener Catherine Chacon Robert Dominquez Erin Doty Michael Dunlap Malinda Emahiser Patrice Frey Joy Fulton Alexis Halpern Brent Herrera Flannery Higgins James Kisner Richard Kwiatkowski Prince LeBoo Jesus (Jesse) Lopez Maricella Loza Sara Mohoney Chad Marshall Richard McGuire Jorie Mead Kathryn Montgomery Mary Newman Elizabeth Nguyen Susan Oliver Christine Paces Lindsay Petrie Marissa Pyle Rory Quintana Nathan Ramsey Mathew Ringler John Riordan Odessa Roberts Michelle Ryan Taraneh Shadzi Dana Snyder-Camp Scott Wagner Sean Williams Marissa Woodring Mark Wright Aaron Wynn ____________________
 
The speaker is HORN and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to two extraordinary leaders in the Long-Beach Lakewood area who are being honored by Temple Israel of Long Beach and who are also two dear friends. For 29 years, Dr. Ronald and Sylvia Hartman have been at the vanguard of building the Long Beach-Lakewood area as well as its medical community, its arts community, and its Jewish community. Both of the Hartmans are proven and accomplished leaders with impeccable judgment, breathtaking dynamism, and a sense of style and camaraderie which energizes everyone who works with them. Dr. Ron Hartman, born in Brooklyn, raised in Forest Hills, attended Cornell University and New York Medical School. Sylvia, born in Manhattan, was also raised in Forest Hills. Although they both attended Forest Hills High School, they did not meet until Ron's sister arranged a blind date while Ron was a first-year medical student and Sylvia was at Queen's College. Eight months later, Ron and Sylvia were married. Ron did his internship at Stamford, CT, and his residency at the University of Pennsylvania and the Harlem Eye and Ear Hospital. The Hartmans moved to Lakewood, CA in 1964. They immediately became involved in their new community--literally hitting the ground running. A distinguished ophthalmologist, Ron served as chief of staff of Lakewood Regional Medical Center and as chairman of the department of ophthalmology at the Long Beach Memorial Medical Center. He was also president of the Far Western Medical Association, Phi Delta Epsilon graduate medical fraternity, and the Long Beach Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat Society as well as treasurer of the Galen Medical Club. In addition to his private practice in ophthalmology, Ron is a clinical professor of ophthalmology at the University of California at Irvine where he received the department's 1993 ``Excellence in Teaching'' award. After four distinguished terms as president of Temple Israel in Long Beach, Ron is currently serving as vice president of the Temple Israel Foundation. Under his leadership and the leadership of Sylvia who served on the Temple's school board, the Temple has become one of the most celebrated synagogues in the southland area. Sharing an active interest in the arts with his wife, Ron has served as president of the Long Beach Museum of Art Foundation. Sylvia's volunteer activities are as daunting in their volume as they are in their substance. It was a pleasure to work with her on many activities when I was president of California State University, Long Beach. Sylvia served the university as president of the Fine Arts Affiliates and now acts as advisor to the group. She has made a significant leadership contribution to the University Art Museum as a board member. She has chaired the art department advisory board and has served on the School of Health Sciences' advisory board. Sylvia is currently in her second term as a member of the board of directors of the Long Beach Museum of Art Foundation, where she serves on its executive committee. She has held numerous leadership roles on behalf of the Long Beach Museum: as chairman of the directors circle, as president of Phoenix, the Museum's major support group, and as current chairman of the Trustees and Officers Nominating Committee. Sylvia has not only made a mark in the visual arts but has also had a great impact on the performing arts in the Long Beach-Lakewood area serving as an executive board member of the Long Beach Opera and as co- chairman of the Opera Ring. Given her sterling achievements in building the visual and the performing arts in the community and her vibrancy and dynamism as an arts advocate, it is no surprise that Sylvia is the 1993 recipient of the Public Corporation for the Arts ``Distinguished Arts Volunteer of the Year'' award for the City of Long Beach. In addition to raising four sons, Sylvia was also a Cub Scout Den Mother for 9 years, a homeowners association president in Sun Valley, ID, for 5 years, and has been heavily involved in the Jewish community with the National Council of Jewish Women (Chair of Charter Day) and chairman of the Diamond Circle Division for the women's Division of the Long Beach Jewish Federation. Sylvia is also ways and means chair for Cameo, the professional auxiliary of the Assistance League of Long Beach, and she serves on the California Republican Party State Central Committee. On top of this impressive array of community activities, Sylvia works full time as a real estate broker associated with Dolphin Properties in Long Beach. The Hartmans have four brilliant and super-achieving sons. The eldest, Carl, is an ophthalmologist in private practice with his father. Carl is married to Elise. Bruce--who has a master's in computer science--works in research and development for Bell Laboratories in Columbus, OH, and has received awards for excellence. Bruce is married to Julie. Gregg is currently in his orthopedics residency at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and is married to Sharon. Glenn is now completing his master's of fine arts degree at Tulane University in New Orleans. The Hartmans have three adorable grandchildren: Shelby Anne, age 3\1/2\; Sarah Jeanette, who is almost 2; and Jordan Myles, who just turned 1. Speaker, the Hartmans' 29 years of leadership and dedication to the cities of Long Beach and Lakewood, the medical community, the arts community, and the Jewish community have truly set the standard for all who know them and who work with them. Whether working on community projects separately or together, their energy, style, and sense of mission have made them role models in the area. As Temple Israel of Long Beach honors Dr. Ron and Sylvia Hartman for their tremendous leadership in helping build their community and the synagogue, I am proud to join their many friends and extraordinary family in wishing them the very best for success in all their continuing activities which so notably strengthen and enhance our communities, the medical profession, the visual and performing arts, and American Jewish life. ____________________
 
The speaker is ORTIZ and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to an outstanding public servant, Bob Quigley, assistant regional administrator for region VI of the U.S. Small Business Administration in Dallas, TX. Bob is 1 of only 10 procurement officers for the Small Business Administration, his jurisdiction falling over Texas and the surrounding States. He directs the operations involving prime-contracting, set asides, and subcontracting with large prime contractors. Annually, he is responsible for ensuring that the SBA meets the goals which we here in Washington insist that they meet. As we all know, that is no small task. Bob and I have worked on many projects together, both in the Coastal Bend and in the Valley--and I am forever grateful to him for his help and his wisdom in guiding me and my staff through the murky waters of the SBA bureaucracy. I have appreciated his knowledge about matters relating to small business. Bob Quigley was most instrumental in directing contracts for the work associated with the construction of Naval Station Ingleside--Homeport-- in the Coastal Bend. In the Valley, I remember--and am grateful for-- Bob's work on the Border initiative, which helped settle the Border economy after the devaluation of the peso. His efforts helped to revitalize the Border area and got much needed money to the merchants there to keep the commerce flowing. Speaker and colleagues, this is a man who has served our country in our Government for a total of 30 years. I ask that you all join me today in commending a great American patriot, and a fabulous administrator for the Dallas SBA for 14 years, Bob Quigley. ____________________
 
The speaker is STENHOLM and he says  Speaker, today Bob Smith, L.F. Payne, Olympia Snowe, Joe Kennedy, Jim Inhofe, Joe Barton, Jon Kyl and I are introducing a rule for the consideration of House Joint Resolution 103, the Balanced Budget Constitutional Amendment. The rule that we are introducing will ensure that we have a full, fair and open debate on this extremely important issue of amending the Constitution. In drafting this rule, we felt it was imperative that there be a full airing of all views within this body about the subject. We felt that it is important that there be fair representation along party lines, as well as some representation of the degree of support among House Members. Finally, we felt that the amendments chosen should reflect the leading ideas for balanced budget amendments. This rule meets these criteria. We believe that this rule sets out a framework for consideration of the balanced budget amendment that is fair to all sides of this important issue. The rule that we are introducing is essentially the same rule that was approved by the House for the consideration of the amendment in June 1992. It would provide for 9 hours of general debate and allow for the consideration of as many as five substitute amendments comprising all of the major alternative approaches to the issue: an amendment by Representative Jon Kyl; an amendment by Representative Jack Brooks, chairman of the Judiciary Committee; an amendment by Representative Joe Barton; the text of a Senate-passed amendment, if any; and an amendment by Representatives Stenholm and Smith. the amendments would be considered under a ``king of the hill'' procedure in which the last- passed amendment will be voted on for final passage. In addition to establishing a framework for consideration of the balanced budget amendment, introduction of this rule today underscores our commitment to pursue a discharge petition if one is necessary. I do not believe that it will be necessary to file a discharge petition in order to obtain a vote on the balanced budget amendment, but we wanted to have the discharge option available if circumstances convince us that a discharge petition is the best way to obtain a vote on the amendment. The 262 Members of this body who have cosponsored House Joint Resolution 103 have indicted the urgency they feel about the need to gain some control of a Federal debt which is reaching frightening proportions. Speaker, the American people, over 75 percent of whom support a balanced budget amendment, want action on a balanced budget amendment. I am confident that the House will take action on the amendment and that we will vote to send this issue to the States for the ratification process. The rule we introduce today moves us one step farther in that direction. ____________________
 
The speaker is STOKES and he says  Speaker, I take pride in saluting an outstanding constituent of the 11th Congressional District, Omar Ali-Bey, who is the recipient of an Outstanding Leadership Award. On Saturday, January 29, 1994, a host of elected officials, community leaders, and friends will gather to recognize this dedicated human being for his many contributions to our community. I am pleased to join in this tribute to my friend, Omar Ali-Bey. Over the years, Omar Ali-Bey has devoted his efforts to eradicate drugs, crime, and violence from the Cleveland community. He has spearheaded the development of neighborhood watch programs throughout Cleveland's public housing and inner-city areas. Much of Omar's work has focused on inner-city gangs and the prevention of gang violence. As Chair of the 11th Congressional District caucus, I am particularly proud to note his leadership of the Safety and Crime Committee. It was his leadership in this capacity that enabled the caucus to become involved in matters related to police brutality, racism, and providing a forum for aggrieved families such as the Michael Pipkins family and others. It was also his leadership which forced the city of Cleveland to acknowledge the wrongs perpetrated upon the black community when Feckner, a drug dealer, was permitted by the Cleveland Police Department to sell drugs in the black community. In many ways, Omar Ali-Bey has been the conscience of our community. Speaker, at this time, I want to share with my colleagues and the Nation some additional information concerning Omar Ali-Bey and his contributions to the Greater Cleveland community. I am proud to salute Omar Ali-Bey and I applaud his tireless efforts on behalf of our children and the community. I offer my congratulations as he receives the Outstanding Leadership Award. [From the Outstanding Leadership Awards] Omar Ali-Bey ``The goal is to stop the killing. The goal is to stop the violence. The goal is unity in the community. The goal is overcoming our illusions of differences whether we are Muslim or Christian or Democrat or Republican or Vice Lord or Folk or Crip or Blood . . .'' Activist Omar Ali-Bey, sustained by his unyielding faith in God, has dedicated his life to making the quality of life in Cleveland's inner city better for African-Americans, including those who are ex-convicts, drug addicts, and gang members. In his unrelenting quest to instill pride and a sense of cultural identity in those who are disenfranchised, Ali-Bey tirelessly volunteers his time in many organizations. Ali-Bey is co-founder of Peace in the Hood, an organization whose purpose is to facilitate peace among the gangs so that their problems can be resolved without violence. In June, 1993, Ali-Bey assisted in bringing a national peace summit to Cleveland to address the problem of gang violence. Ali-Bey stated, ``The goal is to stop the killing. The goal is to stop the violence. The goal is overcoming our illusions of differences whether we are Muslim or Christian or Democrat or Republican or Vice Lord or Folk or Crip or Blood. No. We are an African family. PERIOD.'' Ali-Bey is proud that this organization has helped some gang members to voluntarily join drug patrols that work to stop drug trafficking. Also, Ali-Bey is co-founder of ADAM Rites of Passage, a program that focuses on teaching pride, morals and empowerment to African-American youth. ADAM is an acronym for Action Strategies for the Development of All Mankind. Ali-Bey volunteers four days a week to this program in some of Cleveland's public schools, and also advises youth about the danger of drugs and sex. In addition to his volunteerism, Ali-Bey is employed by Wings of Hope, a crime reduction program sponsored by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Ali-Bey serves as a drug and gang prevention specialist at housing projects of Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority (CMHA). In that capacity, Ali-Bey heads the Anti-Drug Patrol which consists of eighteen young men who volunteer their services. Ali-Bey's dedication, sensitivity, and motivation stem, in part, from his past personal experiences of incarceration and drug abuse. He has unselfishly shared his time and life experiences to help those similarly situated, and to help others avoid similar pitfalls. Ali-Bey is driven by his desire to help exconvicts and former drug addicts make a meaningful ``contribution back to society.'' Although Ali-Bey dropped out of Cleveland's East Technical High School in the 11th grade, he has since earned his GED, and two associate degrees in business management and in marketing from Cuyahoga Community College. Ali-Bey earned a bachelor's degree in marketing from Dyke College. Ali-Bey takes pride in being Chairman of the Board of H&S International Distributions, Inc. which distributes antimicrobial products known as Germ Stoppers. The company created an economic improvement program to expose African- American youth to entrepreneurial training. Ali-Bey is very proud to have served as the Chairman of the Safety and Crime Committee of the 11th Congressional District Caucus for the past eight years. Ali-Bey, a member of the Islamic faith, stated that he will continue pursuing his goals simply ``for the salvation of the children.'' Regardless of one's religious affiliation, Ali- Bey welcomes the assistance of anyone who has similar desires and concerns. He summarized his efforts as, ``Every day that I breathe, I try to make a difference. I know that I'm just one man, but one man and God is a majority.'' Omar Ali-Bey is held in high esteem by the Greater Cleveland community, the state, and indeed the nation. Ali-Bey and his wife, Kalima, are the proud parents of five children. ____________________
 
The speaker is POSHARD and he says  Speaker, I am very proud to have the eastern half of the Shawnee National Forest in the 19th Congressional District which I am privileged to serve here in the U.S. House of Representatives. Each year, this forest provides thousands of visitors an opportunity to enjoy the awesome wonders of nature. The Shawnee National Forest provides a backdrop to countless family reunions, scout retreats, camping expeditions and fishing trips. I remember many occasions in which my family and I had the opportunity to enjoy the beauty and natural resources provided by the Shawnee National Forest. Unfortunately, the Shawnee National Forest has seen the devastation and destruction of fire caused not by nature's cycle, but by man's carelessness. Because of the growing number of fires caused by man, the Shawnee National Forest has had to call upon Smokey Bear, the Forest Service's spokesperson on forest fire prevention, to aid in educating Americans, young and old alike, about the importance in being responsible keepers of the forest. On August 9, 1994, Smokey Bear will celebrate his 50th year of bringing his message of forest fire prevention to millions of Americans. Created by artist Albert Staehle, Smokey was first introduced to America in a forest service poster as a bear clad in a hat and a pair of blue jeans asking people to extinguish their campfires when visiting our Nation's parks and forests. Over the next 50 years, Smokey's image and message of ``Only you can prevent forest fires!'' has been seen and heard on radio, television and in thousands of classrooms and educational settings. Smokey has also received his own television series and film, was seen at the National Zoo and has appeared in hundreds of parades, including the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade. Smokey has achieved such national recognition over the past 50 years that he received his own zip code and stamp from the U.S. Postal Service. Recipient of the OBIE Award for Excellence for outdoor advertising, the Smokey Bear campaign remains the longest running public service advertising campaign in the history of The Advertising Council. The Forest Service estimates that human-caused wildfires have been reduced by approximately one-half since Smokey Bear was introduced in 1944. This is despite the fact that more than 10 times as many people visit our national parks and forests today as in the 1940's. I have to admit, that is quite an accomplishment for a bear. So it is with great pride that I wish Smokey Bear a happy 50th birthday and the United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service warm congratulations on a very successful educational campaign to preserve our Nation's forests. I invite my fellow colleagues and all of America to join with me in celebrating Smokey Bear's 50th birthday and 50 years of successfully preserving the beauty and tranquility of our national parks and forests. ____________________
 
The speaker is SANGMEISTER and he says  Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to one of the business cornerstones in my district, Amoco Chemicals of Joliet, IL, which will also be recognized Feb. 7 by the Joliet Region Chamber of Commerce and Industry with its annual salute to Industry Award. Although Amoco Chemicals is a subsidiary of one of the biggest corporations in the world, it is firmly focused on the community in which it has been located since 1958. The company has blended employment opportunities, research and community involvement in making its mark on the Joliet region. Amoco Chemicals employs more than 500 area residents in high-paying jobs producing chemicals used in the production of food service containers, wire coatings, fiberglass, paint, oil additives and other industrial and consumer products. Amoco is continuously improving the quality of its products through the input of its employees, suppliers and customers. In addition to its outstanding reputation for quality manufacturing, Amoco Chemicals encourages its employees to make an investment in the community. Employees volunteer their time through the Amoco-Culbertson Education Partnership and the United Way of Will County. Amoco also has been a generous underwriter of local civic and charitable causes, such as Special Olympics, the Boy Scouts, Joliet Junior College and many other worthy organizations. The company awarded the Joliet/Will County Center for Economic Development, an organization designed to strengthen the local economy, $150,000 to fund its efforts. Amoco is also a good neighbor. It has organized the Citizens' Advisory Panel, where 10 local residents meet regularly with the plant manager to discuss the plant's activities and how they impact the community. Amoco has also been at the forefront in reducing its waste emissions with innovative programs. Speaker, I salute Amoco Chemicals on its contributions to our local economy and its involvement in the community of Joliet and congratulate the company on its well-deserved Salute to Industry Award. ____________________
 
The speaker is HOCHBRUECKNER and he says  Speaker, I rise today to honor Debra Brodie Foster, an outstanding citizen who recently retired from the East Hampton Town Planning Board. Over the past 15 years, Foster has been instrumental in preserving East Hampton's admirable environmental record. Debra Foster has consistently fought to maintain East Hampton's precious resources by striking a balance between development and preservation. Foster's motivation was pure and simple; she envisioned an East Hampton in which people could continue to cherish and enjoy the environment. Today, Debra's dream is reality as seen through East Hampton's clean waterways, dense woodlands, and famous beaches. Although Foster has left the town planning board, her legacy remains through her work for East Hampton's environment. I am certain that Debra Foster's determined leadership will be missed by eastern Long Island. I am confident, however, that the East Hampton Town Planning Board will continue to follow Foster's example. Speaker, it is my great pleasure to recognize Debra Brodie Foster, chairperson of East Hampton Town Planning Board, for her extraordinary efforts on behalf of the environment and her community. I wish Debra the best in her future endeavors and I am glad to call her my friend. ____________________
 
The speaker is CLINGER and he says  Speaker, according to a recently updated Congressional Research Service [CRS] Report, after nearly 1 full year in office, President Clinton has failed to fill 53.3 percent of the top positions at the Department of Commerce, 41.3 percent of the top positions at the Pentagon, and 36.7 percent of the top positions at the Department of Justice. These abundant vacancies, according to CRS, rank the Commerce, Defense, and Justice Departments as the three executive agencies with the highest level of unfilled positions in the Clinton administration. By contrast, the Departments of Housing and Urban Development [HUD], Health and Human Services [HHS], and the Department of Labor [DOL] ranked at the three agencies with the fewest remaining vacancies. It doesn't take a Ph.D. in political science to figure out that an administration fills the positions it considers the most important first. Actions speak louder than words. The Clinton administration's actions of the past year clearly demonstrates that all the tough talk and political rhetoric about being a new Democrat is, in fact, just talk. The facts show that ensuring a healthy business climate, maintaining a strong and ready military, and fighting crime with a fair and effective justice system rank at the bottom of Clinton's priorities. You simply can't develop and implement policies in these vitally important areas without the people in place to do it. Talking is one thing that this President and administration are particularly skilled in, making decisions and taking action is something they're not. The massacre in Mogidishu, the halting deployment turned retreat in Haiti, and the on-again, off-again bombing threats in Bosnia reflect the indecision and inaction that has become the trademark of this administration, particularly in matters concerning national security. As the ranking Republican member of the House Committee on Government Operations, I urge the President and his White House staff to stop the talk of campaigning and to start the actions of governing. It is particularly important that Clinton get his people in place at the Pentagon. I first expressed this concern nearly 7 months ago in early July this past year. At the time, I pointed out that President Clinton had filled only 33 percent of the Defense Department's top positions, an alarmingly slow pace that was, on average, 50 percent slower than the pace of past Presidents over the last 30 years. I stressed in July that the Clinton administration did not appreciate the potential costs and risks of these delays. Since then, we've witnessed the tragedy in Somalia, the ineptness in Haiti, and the empty threats in Bosnia. Who can say whether our Nation would have avoided these tragic and humiliating episodes if appropriate policymakers were in place. We do know, however, that Clinton administration officials in the Defense and State Departments refused to appear at a November hearing regarding America's role in U.N. peacekeeping because they were only then, in their words, ``developing the policy on peacekeeping at the highest levels.'' Filing these vacant administration positions now at least eliminates one of the many possible reasons for the grievous policy errors committed by President Clinton and his administration during his first year in office. Today, there is truly bipartisan concern and recognition for the serious problems caused by President Clinton's slow pace of appointments. In December, on a Sunday talk show, the distinguished Chairman of the Senate Armed Service Committee, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia correctly identified, in my view, the inability of Aspin to get his own team in place as one of the top reasons for Aspin's troubles as Secretary of Defense. I also agree with former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, however, that the responsibility ultimately lies with President Clinton to pick, nominate, and get the right person for the right job in place. As the legacies of Zoe Baird, Kimba Wood, Clifford Wharton, Les Aspin, and most recently, Bobby Ray Inman illustrate all too clearly, Clinton and his team of White House lawyers and policy wonks need to do a better job at finding the right person to do the right job. It's been 1 year, President. The time for explanations has passed--that you could have, should have, or would have done things differently had you or your staff known otherwise is irrelevant. The point is that you didn't. With North Korea looming on the horizon, with Bosnia continually smoldering, with instability in Russia and Central Europe growing, with uncertainty in the Middle East ever-present, with out economy remaining fragile, and with crime threatening the lives and safety of our citizens in their own neighborhoods, the time to get your people in place at the Commerce, Defense, and Justice Departments to address these problems and to avoid the debacles and tragedies of the past year--and to get it right once and for all--is now. ____________________
 
The speaker is NORTON and he says  Speaker, today I introduce the District of Columbia Pension Liability Funding Reform Act of 1994 as my first bill for the second session of the 103d Congress. It is my first bill because it is of first importance to the solvency of the District of Columbia. And it is my first bill because it would at least partially correct indefensible economic unfairness that has been imposed by Congress on the District. I am pleased to be joined in sponsoring this legislation by Congressmen Ronald Dellums, William Jefferson, John Lewis, and Jim McDermott--all distinguished members of the House District Committee. The Congress instituted benefit pension plans for the District's police officers and fire fighters in 1916, for teachers in 1920, and for judges in 1970. In 1979, Congress passed the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act and transferred $2.0 billion in unfunded pension liability from the Federal Government to the residents of the District of Columbia. The pension benefits required by the Federal Government were provided on a pay-as-you-go basis, with payments each year covering only that year's benefit payments. Since fiscal year 1980, the $2.0 billion unfunded liability has increased to $5.0 billion. Only $79 million of this increase went to benefits paid directly to pensioners. Of the $5.0 billion in unfunded liability, $3.7 billion or 75 percent has been for interest on the unfunded federally imposed amount. This amazing case study in fiscal irresponsibility is one of those rare instances in United States history when the rich Federal Government has off-loaded indebtedness to an American city. The unfunded indebtedness has now moved from an unfair burden to a crippling threat to the economic viability of the District of Columbia. The District, still struggling for air from a recession that has smothered its economy, is opposed by unfunded pension liability created and passed on by the Congress. Whoever is responsible, however, all must now take responsibility. The legislation I am introducing today will accomplish this urgent purpose. This bill would enact a plan that is the result of many months of intensive work by all--representatives from the affected employee groups, retirees, the Council, the Mayor's office, the General Accounting Office, the District of Columbia Retirement Board and the District Committee of the Congress. All labored together, month after month, hashed out the tough issues, and all have accepted financial responsibility. My bill essentially tracks the landmark 1990 report prepared by the Rivlin Commission (Alice Rivlin, a distinguished economist is now Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and was the first Director of the Congressional Budget Office), an objective outside blue ribbon commission. Under the bill, retirees would receive one cost of living adjustment per year rather than two, and the rate of contributions from employees would increase from 7 percent to 8 percent. The District would increase its contribution as a constant percent of payroll at a 5 percent annual rate as currently estimated by the actuary. Finally, the Congress would extend its contribution period for 31 years, from fiscal year 2005 to fiscal year 2035, and would increase its current flat contribution of $52.1 million per year at 5 percent for 30 years starting in fiscal year 1996. These are painful prescriptions, especially for the retirees and employees. It is impossible to overemphasize the importance of this legislation to the fiscal health and stability of the District. By the year 2004, pension and interest payments will almost double to 15 percent of the District's operating budget. The closer we get to the year 2004, when the formula for computing the District's portion of the payment changes and the small Congressional contribution both expire, the greater the danger of irreparable harm to the city, to pensioners, and to city employees. The current District of Columbia Retirement Act provides for Federal and District contributions to the retirement funds through 2004. These are pay-as-you-go contributions that do not keep the unfunded liability from increasing. Moreover, the Act's funding provisions do not even attempt to eliminate unfunded liability, but allow interest to accrue at an exponential rate. Under the act, the formula for determining District contributions requires the Federal Government to contribute $52.1 million and the District to fund the rest. Today the District is paying more than $300 million out of its annual operating budget to meet this obligation, more than five times the Federal contribution, consisting almost entirely interest on the original Federal unfunded liability. However, in 2005, the current legislation expires and the District's contribution will then rise to about 15 percent of the revenue collected by the District compared to 8 percent in 1991. By 2005, the unfunded liability will reach $7.7 billion and without new legislation all of the liability would fall to the District. What is at stake in the bill I submit today is essentially everything--the stability of the city's operating budget for years to come and the pensions of the affected retirees and current employees. Considering the risk, what is astonishing is that this dangerous situation has prevailed for so long. My bill has the strong support of Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly and District of Columbia chair David Clark. In fact, Chairman Clarke has already introduced the Full Funding of Pension Liability Retirement Reform Amendment Act of 1994, in the city council. I am attaching a copy of the Clarke bill to this statement. His bill, submitted on December 21, 1993, would obligate the District and its employees and retirees to assume responsibility for by far the largest portion of the unfunded pension liability. Chairman Clarke is acting to expedite council consideration. He has placed his bill at the top of his agenda as I have placed this bill at the top of mine. Indeed, the council's hearings begin today. Because of the extraordinary importance of this bill, I am taking the unusual step of introducing the legislation before the council has passed the Clarke legislation. Although the two bills are directed at different legislatures, there are home rule implications, and ordinarily I would await council passage. However, the council legislation is sponsored by 12 of the 13 members, and mark up in council is expected on February 15. Therefore, I can introduce my bill today without fear of transgressing home rule and thereby also expedite congressional action. I ask my colleagues to take the responsible action contingent only on the willingness of the District government and the effected residents and employees to assume the sacrifices required of them in my bill and in the council legislation. This is not a problem of their making. It originated here. It must end with corrective action here. H.R. -- Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Pension Liability Funding Reform Act of 1994''. TITLE I--FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION TO DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA PENSION FUNDS SEC. 101. INCREASE IN AND EXTENSION OF FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION. (a) In General.--Section 144(a) of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act (sec. 1-724(a), D.C. Code) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``2004--'' and inserting ``2035 the following amounts:''; (2) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``as'' and inserting ``As'', and (B) by striking ``Fund, the sum'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``Fund-- ``(A) for each fiscal year through fiscal year 1995, the sum of $34,170,000, reduced by the amount of any reduction required under section 145(c), ``(B) for fiscal year 1996, the sum of $35,879,000, reduced by the amount of any such reduction, and ``(C) for fiscal year 1997 and each subsequent fiscal year, the amount calculated in accordance with this paragraph for the previous fiscal year increased by 5 percent, reduced by the amount of any such reduction;''; (3) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking ``as'' and inserting ``As'', and (B) by striking ``Fund, the sum'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``Fund-- ``(A) for each fiscal year through fiscal year 1995, the sum of $17,680,000, ``(B) for fiscal year 1996, the sum of $18,564,000, and ``(C) for fiscal year 1997 and each subsequent fiscal year, the amount calculated in accordance with this paragraph for the previous fiscal year increased by 5 percent; and''; and (4) in paragraph (3)-- (A) by striking ``as'' and inserting ``As'', and (B) by striking ``Fund, the sum'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``Fund-- ``(A) for each fiscal year through fiscal year 1995, the sum of $220,000, ``(B) for fiscal year 1996 the sum of $231,000, and ``(C) for fiscal year 1997 and each subsequent fiscal year, the amount calculated in accordance with this paragraph for the previous fiscal year increased by 5 percent.''. (b) Conforming Amendments.--The District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act is amended-- (1) in section 144(e) (sec. 1-724, D.C. Code)-- (A) by striking ``2004'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``2035'', and (B) by striking paragraph (2); (2) in section 145 (sec. 1-725, D.C. Code), by striking ``2004'' each place it appears in subsections (a)(1) and (c)(1) and inserting ``2035''; and (3) in section 162(d) (sec. 1-732(d)(1), D.C. Code), by striking paragraph (5). TITLE II--CHANGES IN RETIREMENT BENEFITS Subtitle A--Police Officers' and Fire Fighters' Contribution SEC. 201. INCREASE IN CONTRIBUTION. The first sentence of subsection (d)(1) of the Policemen and Firemen's Retirement and Disability Act (sec. 4--612(a), D.C. Code) is amended by inserting after ``per centum'' the following: ``(or, with respect to a member who is an officer or member of the Metropolitan Police force or the Fire Department of the District of Columbia, 8 per centum for each pay period which begins on or after October 1, 1995)''. SEC. 202. ESTABLISHMENT OF SINGLE ANNUAL COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT. Subsection (m) of the Policemen and Firemen's Retirement and Disability Act (sec. 4-624, D.C. Code) is amended (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``the Mayor shall'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``on January 1 of each year (or within a reasonable time thereafter), the Mayor shall determine the per centum change in the price index for the preceding year by determining the difference between the index published December of the preceding year and the index published for December of the second preceding year.''; and (2) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: ``(3)(A) If (in accordance with paragraph (2)) the Mayor determines in a year (beginning with 1997) that the per centum change in the price index for the preceding year indicates a rise in the price index, each annuity having a commencing date on or before March 1 of the year shall, effective March 1 of the year, be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) in the case of an annuity having a commencing date on or before March 1 of such preceding year, the per centum change computed under paragraph (2), adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum; or ``(ii) in the case of an annuity having a commencing date after March 1 of such preceding year, a pro rata increase equal to the product of-- ``(I) \1/12\ of the per centum change computed under paragraph (2), multiplied by ``(II) the number of months (not to exceed 12 months, counting any portion of a month as an entire month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum. ``(B) On January 1, 1996 (or within a reasonable time thereafter), the Mayor shall determine the per centum change in the price index published for December 1995 over the price index published for June 1995. If such per centum change indicates a rise in the price index, effective March 1, 1996-- ``(i) each annuity having a commencing date on or before September 1, 1995, shall be increased by an amount equal to such per centum change, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum; and ``(ii) each annuity having a commencing date after September 1, 1995, and on or before March 1, 1996, shall be increased by a pro rata increase equal to the product of-- ``(I) \1/6\ of such per centum change, multiplied by ``(II) the number of months (not to exceed 6 months, counting any portion of a month as an entire month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum.''. SEC. 203. EQUALIZATION OF CONTRIBUTION RULES FOR FORMER RETIREES (2) In General.--Section 209(a)(2)(B) of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act (sec. 4-625(2), D.C. Code) is amended by striking ``having a commencing date after the effective date of such amendment.''. (b) Repeal of Relief Allowance or Compensation Increase.-- Section 301 of the District of Columbia Police and Firemen's Salary Act of 1953 (sec. 4-605, D.C. Code) is repealed. Subtitle B--Teachers' Contribution SEC. 211. INCREASE IN CONTRIBUTION. The first sentence of section 1 of the Act entitled ``An Act for the retirement of public-school teachers in the District of Columbia'', approved August 7, 1946 (sec. 31- 1221(a), D.C. Code), is amended by inserting after ``per centum'' the following: ``(or, with respect to each pay period which begins on or after October 1, 1995, 8 per centum)''. SEC. 212. ESTABLISHMENT OF SINGLE ANNUAL COST-OF-LIVING ADJUSTMENT. Section 21(b) of the Act entitled ``An Act for the retirement of public-school teachers in the District of Columbia'', approved August 7, 1946 (sec. 31-1241(b), D.C. Code) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``The Mayor shall--'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``On January 1 of each year (or within a reasonable time thereafter), the Mayor shall determine the per centum change in the price index for the preceding year by determining the difference between the index published for December of the preceding year and the index published for December of the second preceding year.''; and (2) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2)(A) If (in accordance with paragraph (1)) the Mayor determines in a year (beginning with 1997) that the per centum change in the price index for the preceding year indicates a rise in the price index, each annuity having a commencing date on or before March 1 of the year shall, effective March 1 of the year, be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) in the case of an annuity having a commencing date on or before March 1 of such preceding year, the per centum change computed under paragraph (1), adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 percent centum; or ``(ii) in the case of an annuity having a commencing date after March 1 of such preceding year, a pro rata increase equal to the product of-- ``(I) \1/12\ of the per centum change computed under paragraph (1), multiplied by ``(II) the number of months (not to exceed 12 months, counting any portion of a month as an entire month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum. ``(B) On January 1, 1996 (or within a reasonable time thereafter), the Mayor shall determine the per centum change in the price index published for December 1995 over the price index published for June 1995. If such per centum change indicates a rise in the price index, effective March 1, 1996-- ``(i) each annuity having a commencing date on or before September 1, 1995, shall be increased by an amount equal to such per centum change, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum; and ``(ii) each annuity having a commencing date after September 1, 1995, and on or before March 1, 1996, shall be increased by a pro rata increase equal to the product of-- ``(I) \1/6\ of such per centum change, multiplied by ``(II) the number of months (not to exceed 6 months, counting any portion of a month as an entire month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase, adjusted to the nearest \1/10\ of 1 per centum.''. Subtitle C--Judges' Contribution SEC. 221. INCREASE IN CONTRIBUTION. (a) Amount of Withholding.--The first sentence of section 11-1463(a), D.C. Code, is amended by inserting after ``per centum'' the following: ``(or, with respect to each pay period which begins on or after October 1, 1995, 4\1/2\ per centum)''. (b) Computation of Retirement Salary.--Section 11- 1564(d)(1), D.C. Code, is amended by inserting after ``United States Code,'' the following: ``with respect to services performed before October 1, 1995, and equal to 4\1/2\ per centum of such salary, pay, or compensation with respect to services performed on or after October 1, 1995,''. TITLE III--EFFECTIVE DATE SEC. 301. EFFECTIVE DATE. The amendments made by this Act shall take effect October 1, 1995. ____ A Bill in the Council of the District of Columbia Be it enacted by the District of Columbia, That this act may be cited as the ``Full Funding of Pension Liability Retirement Reform Amendment Act of 1994.'' TITLE I. DISTRICT CONTRIBUTION Sec. 101. Section 142 of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act, approved November 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 877; D.C. Code Sec. 1-722), is amended as follows: (a) Subsection (a) is amended as follows: (1) Paragraph (1)(D)(iii), (D.C. Code Sec. 1- 722(a)(1)(D)(iii)), is repealed. (2) Paragraph (3) is amended as follows: (A) Subparagraph (E), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(a)(3)(A)(v)), is repealed. (B) Subparagraph (G), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(a)(3)(A)(vii)), and the immediately following undesignated paragraph are repealed. (b) Subsection (b) is amended as follows: (1) Paragraph (1) is amended as follows: (A) Subparagraph (A), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(b)(1)(A)), is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1)(A) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the District payment for each Fund for each fiscal year shall equal the sum of the net normal cost and the amortization payment defined in the following paragraph (b)(2).''. (B) Subparagraph (B), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(a)(1)(B)), is amended to read as follows: ``(B) The total payment for all Funds for each fiscal year shall not be less than $295,500,000. (C) Subparagraphs (C)-(F), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(b)(1)(C)- (F)), are repealed. (2) Paragraph (2), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(b)(2)), is amended to read as follows: ``(2) The amortization payment shall be the sum of the payments required to amortize, as a level percentage of payroll, the following: ``(A) The unfunded actuarial liability as of October 1, 1995 over a 40-year period; ``(B) Any increases or decreases in unfunded actuarial liability due to experience gains or losses, or changes in actuarial assumptions, over a period of 15 years from the valuation date when first calculated; and ``(C) Any increases or decreases in unfunded actuarial liability due to changes in benefits provisions over a period of 25 years from the valuation date when first calculated.''. (3) A new paragraph, (3), is added as follows: ``(3) Determinations under paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section shall be made in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and practices.''. (c) Subsection (c)(1)(A) is amended by striking the number ``2003'' and inserting the number ``2035'' in its place. (d) Subsection (d) is amended as follows: (1) paragraph (1), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(d)(1)) is amended as follows: (A) The lead-in language is amended to read as follows: ``Whenever any change in benefits under a retirement program is made, the enrolled actuary engaged pursuant to section 162(a)(4)(A) shall estimate the effect of the change in benefits over the next five fiscal years on''. (B) Subparagraph (A) is amended by striking the coma after the work ``program'' and inserting the work ``and'' in its place. (C) Subparagraph (C), (D.C. code Sec. 1-722(d)(1)(C)), is repealed. (D) Subparagraph (D), (D.C. code Sec. 1-722(d)(1)(D)), is repealed. (2) Paragraph (2), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-722(d)(2)), is repealed. TITLE II. FEDERAL CONTRIBUTION Sec. 201. Section 144 of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act, approved November 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 881; D.C. Code Sec. 1-724) is amended as follows: (a) Subsection (a), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-724(a)), is amended as follows: (1) The lead-in language in subsection (a) is amended by: (A) striking the number ``1980'' and inserting the number ``1995'' in its place, and (B) striking the number ``2004'' and inserting the number ``2035'' in its place. (2) Paragraph (1), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-724(a)(1)), is amended by inserting after the number ``$34,170,000'' the phrase ``in fiscal year 1995, $35,879,000 in fiscal year 1996, and increased by 5 percent per year through fiscal year 2035''. (3) Paragraph (2), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-724(a)(2)), is amended by inserting after the number ``$17,680,000'' the phrase ``in fiscal year 1995, $18,564,000 in fiscal year 1996, and increased by 5 percent per year through fiscal year 2035''. (4) Paragraph (3), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-724(a)(3)), is amended by inserting after the number ``$220,000'' the phrase ``in fiscal year 1995, $231,000 in fiscal year 1996, and increased by 5 percent per year through fiscal year 2035''. (b) Subsection (e), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-724(e)), is amended as follows: (1) Paragraph (1) is amended by striking the number ``2004'' and inserting the number '`2035'' in its place. (2) Paragraph (2) is repealed. TITLE III. POLICE OFFICERS' AND FIRE FIGHTERS' CONTRIBUTION Sec. 301. Section 12 of An Act Making appropriations to provide for the expenses of the government of the District of Columbia for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and seventeen, and for other purposes, approved September 1, 1916 (39 Stat. 718; D.C. Code Sec. 4-601, et seq.), is amended as follows: (a) Subsection (d)(1), (D.C. Code Sec. 4-612(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d)(1) On and after the 1st day of the 1st pay period which begins on or after the applicability date of this section, there shall be deducted and withheld from each member's basic salary an amount equal to 8 per centum of such basic salary.'' (b) Subsection (m) is amended as follows: (A) Paragraph (2) is amended as follows: (i) Subparagraph (A), (D.C. Code Sec. 4-624(b)(1)), is amended by: (i) Striking the phrase ``(A)'', (ii) Capitalizing the word ``on'' in the first line, (iii) Striking the word ``June'' in the last line and inserting the phrase ``the previous December'' in its place, and (iv) Striking the phrase ``,and'' in the last line and inserting a period in its place. (B) Subparagraph (B), (D.C. Code Sec. 4-624(b)(2)), is repealed. Paragraph (3), (D.C. Code Sec. 4-624(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3)(A) If in any year the per centum change determined indicates a rise in the consumer price index, then each annuity having a commencing date not later than March 1 of such year, shall, effective March 1 of the succeeding year, be increased by the per centum change computed under paragraph (2) above, adjusted to the nearest one-tenth of 1 per centum. ``(B) Each annuity having a commencing date after March 1 of such year shall be increased by the per centum change computed under paragraph (2) above on a pro rata basis, adjusted to the nearest one-tenth of 1 per centum. The pro rata increase shall be equal to the product of ``i. \1/12\ of the applicable percent change computed under subparagraph (A) of this section, multiplied by ``ii. the number of months (not to exceed 12 months, counting any portion of a month as a month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase.''. Sec. 302. Section 301 of the District of Columbia Police and Firemen's Salary Act of 1953, approved June 20, 1953 (67 Stat. 75; D.C. Code Sec. 4-605), is repealed. Sec. 303. Section 209(a)(2) of the District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act, approved November 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 914; D.C. Code Sec. 4-625(2)), is amended by striking the phrase ``having a commencing date after the effective date of such amendment''. TITLE IV. TEACHERS' CONTRIBUTION Sec. 401. An Act For the retirement of public-school teachers in the District of Columbia, approved August 7, 1946. (60 Stat. 875; D.C. Code Sec. 31-1221 et seq.)), is amended as follows: (a) Section 1, (D.C. Code Sec. 31-1221(a)), is amended as follows: (1) By striking the phrase ``December 31, 1969'' and inserting the phrase ``the applicability date of this section'' in its place, and (2) By striking the number ``7'' and inserting the number ``8'' in its place. (b) Section 21(b) is amended as follows: (1) Paragraph (1) is amended as follows: (A) Subparagraph (A), (D.C. Code Sec. 31-1241(b)(1)(A)), is amended by: (i) Striking the phase ``(A)'' (ii) Capitalizing the word ``on'' in the first line. (iii) Striking the word ``June'' in the last line and inserting the phrase ``the previous December'' in its place, and (iv) Striking the phrase ``,and'' in the last line and inserting a period its place. (B) Subparagraph (B), (D.C. Code Sec. 31-1241(b)(1)(B), is repealed. (2) Paragraph (2), (D.C. Code Sec. 31-1241(b)(2)), is amended to read as follows: ``(2)(A) If in any year the per centum change determined indicates a rise in the consumer price index, then each annuity having a commencing date not later than March 1 of such year, shall, effective March 1 of the succeeding year, be increased by the per centum change computed under paragraph (2) above, adjusted to the nearest one-tenth of 1 per centum. ``(B) Each annuity having a commencing date after March 1 of such year shall be increased by the per centum change computed under paragraph (2) above on a pro rata basis, adjusted to the nearest one-tenth of 1 per centum. The pro rata increase shall be equal to the product of ``i. \1/2\ of the applicable percent change computed under paragraph (2) of this section, multiplied by ``ii. the number of months (not to exceed 12 months, counting any portion of a month as a month) for which the annuity was payable before the effective date of the increase.''. TITLE V. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS (a) 501. The District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act, approved November 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 866; D.C. Code Sec. 1- 701 et seq.)), is amended as follows: (a) Sec. 145(d) is amended as follows: 1. Paragraph (1) is amended by striking the number ``2001'' and inserting the number ``2034'' in this place. 2. Paragraph (2) is amended by striking the number ``2002'' and inserting the number ``2034'' in its place. (b) Sec. 162(d)(5), (D.C. Code Sec. 1-732(d)(1)(E), is repealed. TITLE VI. APPLICABILITY DATE Sec. 601. Notwithstanding any other law, Title 1 Sec. 101(b)(1) and (2), and Title II, III, IV, and V shall apply to any action or transaction taken or undertaken with respect to the Police Officers and Fire Fighters' Retirement Fund, the Teachers' Retirement Fund and the Judges' Retirement Fund on and after October 1, 1995. TITLE VII. EFFECTIVE DATE Sec. 701. This act shall take effect on the later of: (1) completion of a 30-day period of Congressional review following approval by the Mayor (or in the event of veto by the Mayor, action by the Council of the District of Columbia to override the veto) as provided in section 602(c)(1) of the District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act, approved December 24, 1973 (87 Stat. 813; D.C. Code Sec. 1-233(c)(1)), and publication in either the District of Columbia Register, the District of Columbia Statutes-at-Large, or the District of Columbia Municipal Regulations; or (2) enactment by Congress of Titles II, III, IV, and V of this act, and of an amendment to D.C. Code Sec. 11-1563 which strikes the first sentence in subsection (a) and inserts a sentence to read ``From on or after the first day of the first pay period which begins on or after the applicability date of this section, there shall be deducted and withheld from the basic salary of each judge who has elected to come within the provisions of this subchapter an amount equal to 4\1/2\ per centum of the judge's basic salary.''. ____________________
 
The speaker is LaROCCO and he says  Speaker, on March 31, 1993, I introduced the ``Idaho Wilderness, Sustainable Forests and Communities Act of 1993'' (H.R. 1570). Since then, I have held two congressional field hearings in Lewiston and Boise in my District. My staff and I have held innumerable discussions with State and local officials; with representatives from the timber industry; with working men and women; with conservationists; and with recreationists. We have heard from literally thousands of Idahoans from all backgrounds who have a common interest in resolving the issue of Idaho's roadless areas. As a result, I have revised my legislation to reflect an emerging consensus of Idahoans. This bill will result in the release of two thirds of the roadless areas--260,000 additional acres--to the Forest Plans which, in turn, will result in certainty and stability for our communities and sustainability for our forests. In short, it is a jobs bill. The bill reflects my agreement with Governor Andrus on Meadow Creek and to protect Idaho's water. It strengthens the original language on private property rights. And, it makes revisions in each of the five national forests in the first district. water rights Upon introduction of my original bill, I promised I would address the issue of water rights during the legislative process. With the advice and agreement of Governor Andrus, the language would prohibit the assertion of any claim, based on this Act or any other Act, for any U.S. water right for areas designated as wilderness or special management area in my bill. It would also prohibit the use of eminent domain--condemnation--for acquiring either water or water rights within areas designated in my bill. In addition, several ongoing efforts continue to hold promise to address this contentious issue including compromise language recently enacted for wilderness in Colorado as well as the Snake River adjudication process. The bill attempts to exclude any water facilities, such as impoundments, ditches, and pipelines, from the wilderness boundaries proposed in my bill. If, through oversight any such facility is included, I will work to make sure that continued access to these facilities is permitted. private property rights The bill expands the original language to protect private property rights beyond any previous wilderness legislation enacted into law. This bill would establish a process whereby an owner of property adjacent to wilderness established under this bill could file a claim for compensation for any reduction in property value. Of course, it is often true that private property adjacent to wilderness increases in value. In addition, this bill retains language from my original bill to prohibit the creation of buffer zones around a wilderness to the detriment of any adjacent private property. idaho panhandle national forests My bill strengthens the timber management language for the special management areas in Boundary County in recognition of the recent cutbacks in Federal timber sales and the recovery actions for species listed or proposed to be listed under the Endangered Species Act. It also provides for an economic analysis to assess the impacts of recovery actions for endangered species. My bill provides for intensive forest management demonstration projects to gather information on increasing wood fiber production through advanced silvicultural practices on areas within Boundary County and portions of the St. Joe National Forest. clearwater national forest My bill removes some 20,000 acres within the timber base from the proposed Great Burn and Lewis and Clark Wilderness. Specifically, it withdraws Fish Lake and the Fish Lake Trail from the Great Burn area. The bill proposes an additional 7,000 acres to be added to the Selway Bitterroot Wilderness. These are lands located in White Sand and Beaver Creeks on the Powell Ranger District. The bill removes some 123,000 acres of special management areas in East Weitas Creek and the Vanderbilt Hill area. The bill includes language to assure that, upon enactment, the boundaries established will take precedence over the boundaries set in the September 1993 Clearwater Agreement. To forestall any delay in revising the Clearwater Forest plan, I have directed the Forest Service to report to Congress if the plan is not revised by December 31, 1996. nez perce national forest With the agreement of Governor Andrus, the bill removes the west side of Meadow Creek from the Meadow Creek additions to the Selway Bitterroot Wilderness, a reduction of some 58,000 acres. Management decisions on West Meadow Creek would be based on the watershed protection projects provided in the legislation. An additional 1,000 acres was designated as wilderness in the Selway Bitterroot Wilderness at the head of Bear Creek on the Montana State line. The Nez Perce portion of Rapid River was designated a special management area with the same prescription shown for the area on the Payette National Forest. This was an oversight and was intended to be included in H.R. 1570. payette national forest The bill removes the addition to the Frank Church River Of No Return Wilderness. It extends the Patrick Butte Wilderness proposal to the north to the Payette National Forest boundary adding 6,000 acres. The French Creek Wilderness proposal was extended north to include the French Creek break lands adding some 5,000 acres. The French Creek Special Management Area included in H.R. 1570 has been removed. The four-wheel drive trail along the South Fork of the Salmon River bisecting the Secesh proposed wilderness was removed from wilderness as well as the adjacent private property. boise national forest The Johnson Creek Special Management Area was removed. In addition to snowmobiles, the Snowbank Special Management Area will now allow the use of off-road vehicles for administrative purposes. acreage summary Boise National Forest: Wilderness: Red Mountain.................................................88,000 Hanson Lake..................................................14,000 Ten Mile/Black Warrior.......................................79,000 Needles.......................................................4,000 Peace Rock...................................................94,000 __________ Total.....................................................271,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Special Management Areas: Breadwinner..................................................41,000 Lime Creek...................................................29,000 Snowbank.....................................................22,000 __________ Total......................................................92,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Payette National Forest: Wilderness: Patrick Butte................................................48,000 French Creek.................................................43,000 Needles......................................................96,000 Secesh......................................................116,000 __________ Total.....................................................303,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Special Management Area: Rapid River..................................................38,000 Nez Perce National Forest: Wilderness: Selway Bitterroot Add. (East Meadow)........................102,000 Selway Bitterroot Add. (Bear Creek/Mt. line)..................1,000 Special Management Area: Rapid River..................................................19,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Clearwater National Forest: Wilderness: Mallard Larkin...............................................77,000 Great Burn..................................................225,000 Lewis and Clark..............................................43,000 Selway Bitterroot Add........................................38,000 __________ Total.....................................................383,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Idaho Panhandle National Forests: Wilderness: Mallard Larkin..............................................123,000 Scotchman Peaks..............................................24,000 Salmo Priest.................................................19,000 Long Canyon..................................................39,000 __________ Total.....................................................205,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Special Management Areas: Selkirk Crest................................................21,000 Continental Mountain..........................................6,000 Saddle Mountain...............................................6,000 Farnham/Russell..............................................24,000 Burton Peak...................................................9,000 Katka Peak...................................................11,000 Bald Eagle....................................................4,000 Timber Buck...................................................8,000 Jack Johnston................................................45,000 __________ Total.....................................................133,000 ========== _______________________________________________________________________ Total Wilderness............................................1,265,000 Special Management Areas......................................282,000 Released to Forest Plans....................................3,040,000 __________ Total...................................................4,586,000
 
