H





The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the previous order, the leadership time is reserved. ____________________
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the previous order, the Senate will now resume consideration of S. 1281, which the clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: A bill (S. 1281) to authorize appropriations for the fiscal years 1994 and 1995 for the Department of State, the United States Information Agency, and related agencies, to provide for the consolidation of international broadcasting activities, and for other purposes. The Senate resumed consideration of the bill. Pending: Brown Amendment No. 1286, to prohibit the sale of defense articles and defense services to countries that participate in the secondary and tertiary boycott of Israel.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Under the order previously entered, the Senator from Pennsylvania [Specter] is recognized to offer his amendment relating to collateral aid. Amendment No. 1287 (Purpose: To require that bilateral assistance and international lending be collateralized by petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities)
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Pennsylvania [Specter] proposes an amendment numbered 1287.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: On page 179, after line 6, insert the following new section: SEC. 714. BILATERAL ASSISTANCE AND INTERNATIONAL LENDING REQUIRED TO BE COLLATERALIZED BY PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, MINERALS, OR OTHER COMMODITIES. (a) United States Action.--(1) Immediately upon enactment of this Act, to the greatest extent possible, all bilateral loans or credits extended by the United States to government and nongovernment entities of the independent states of the former Soviet Union must be collateralized by reserves of petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities and any revenues earned from the sales thereof. (2) Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to 1994, and not later than January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the President of the United States shall certify to Congress that, with respect to all bilateral loans or credits extended to the independent states of the former Soviet Union, all opportunities to seek collateral for such loans or credits have been considered and that, in the case of such loans which are not collateralized, such states are adhering to the debt repayment schedules stipulated by the terms of such loans or credits. (3) If the President cannot certify that the conditions contained in paragraph (2) for any state or entity in such state have been met, then no further bilateral loans or credits to that state or entity in such state shall be extended in that calendar year. (b) Multilateral Actions.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and not later than January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall-- (1) certify that each independent state of the former Soviet Union is adhering to the debt repayment schedules stipulated by multilateral lending institutions; or (2) with respect to any state or entity in such state that is not adhering to such schedules, direct the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the United States executive directors to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to propose that such institutions establish policies in opposition to the extension of any credit, or the issuance of any guarantee with respect to any credit, in that calendar year, for the purpose of assisting that state or entities in such state unless such credits or guarantees are collateralized by reserves of petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities and any revenues earned from the sales thereof. (c) Use of Collateral.--With respect to all bilateral and multilateral loans for which collateral is obtained, such collateral shall be converted in such a way as not to unduly disrupt the underlying market of the relevant commodity. (d) Exception.--Bilateral and multilateral loans made explicitly for humanitarian purposes shall not be subject to the terms specified in this section. (e) Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``independent states of the former Soviet Union'' has the same meaning given to that term by section 3 of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 U.S.C. 5801); and (2) the term ``petroleum product'' means crude oil, residual fuel oil, or any refined petroleum product (including any natural liquid and any natural gas liquid product). ____________________
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, before consideration of this amendment commences, I ask unanimous consent that Angela Stinchcomb, a staffer of mine, be permitted to come to the floor.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  She is a newly arrived staff member from Russell, KS, my hometown and the hometown of our distinguished Republican leader.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The Senator from Pennsylvania is recognized.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, this amendment provides that there shall be collateral security on loans made by the United States to the newly independent states, formerly of the Soviet Union. The amendment applies most specifically to Russia. It is a very simple amendment in that its purpose is to guarantee--that is, to make certain--to the maximum extent possible, that money which the United States loans to Russia and the other former Republics of the Soviet Union will be repaid. It is in accordance with customary commercial transactions. It is the way a bank would loan money to a husband and wife who seek to have a mortgage on a house. It is the way that good friends handle their businesses, and sometimes even within a family context. The United States has committed to a policy to assist the former Soviet Republics, and that is a policy with which I very much agree. As we have seen perestroika and glasnost come to the Soviet Union and as we have seen the disintegration of the Soviet Union, it is the judgment of our country--very sound judgment--that the new Government of Russia, led by President Boris Yeltsin, should be encouraged and supported. The disintegration of the Soviet Union is the major international political event of the 20th century. It rivals World War II and World War I as the major events of the 20th century. It does so in the context that the demise of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics [U.S.S.R.] signifies the victory of capitalism over communism and democracy over totalitarianism. It has been a marvelous result for freedom, and it has been achieved, unlike the two world wars, without the firing of a shot. As former President Gorbachev had instituted perestroika and glasnost, President Boris Yeltsin is moving ahead with democracy and economic reforms in efforts to try to democratize Russia and create a market economy: Those are objectives which the United States should support. Without dwelling on them at any great length, they are important objectives for the United States because they will limit, and perhaps ultimately even eliminate, much of the necessity for U.S. expenditures on the arms race. Democratization of the former Soviet Union is very important as an example to other Communist nations that democracy is the right course. Recently, I had the opportunity to travel to China, Vietnam, Indonesia, and Thailand with a Senate delegation of the Senate Energy Committee. The revelations in China and Vietnam are profound in that these Communist countries are moving toward capitalism. They call it a ``socialist market economy,'' which is really an oxymoron, inconsistent on its face. But capitalism is burgeoning in those traditionally Communist countries. While their once closed economies are moving toward a free market, toward capitalist institutions, their political structure continues to be Communist. It is obvious to me that Russia has set a very good example for the development of democracy in those countries. Along with our delegation, I had a chance to discuss that issue with the Secretary General of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Secretary General Muoi. I asked a question about whether Vietnam might be looking to the Russian model for glasnost, perestroika, and democracy. Secretary General Muoi responded that his country was not about to copy Russia and, interestingly, talked about Lincoln and the ``government of the people by the people and for the people.'' Quite a compliment to the United States that Secretary General Muoi is looking to the U.S. model. But I do believe in the long run that China, Vietnam, and other Communist countries, perhaps even North Korea, will be profoundly influenced by the Russian experiment. Therefore, this provides another very good reason why we ought to do our utmost to see democracy flourish in Russia to the maximum extent possible. In that context, President, it is my judgment that we cannot give President Boris Yeltsin and his government, or any other government of the former Soviet Union, or even private institutions in these countries, a blank check. Many grave concerns about the current status of the Russian economy have been suppressed. We see daily reports in the media about Russian officials resigning because they are frustrated in their attempts to curtail inflation and move Russia closer to a market economy. There are many diverse, in fact, turbulent forces at work in Russia. Therefore, it is a difficult judgment call as to precisely how far President Boris Yeltsin can go on free market activities and the suppression of inflation. But those are pressures, President, which I think have to be maintained by the United States on Russia as we move forward with the very substantial loans which our Government is talking about. Aside from the economic context, I have great concerns about the events in Russia last fall; the firing on the Russian parliament, and the disbanding of the constitutional court. Senator Robert Bennett and I had an opportunity to visit in Moscow briefly and to talk to the former chief justice of the constitutional court, Chief Justice Zorkin. I was, frankly, dismayed to see President Boris Yeltsin cancel the court, that is by decree to eliminate the constitutional court. As we talked to people in Russia, the constitutional court was eliminated because they handed down ``unfair decisions''--unfair decisions. If that was the standard for continuing courts in other countries, I do not know that there would be a judicial system anywhere in the world, even in the United States. While those actions have been taken by President Boris Yeltsin as he sees fit, it is my view that we ought not to condone those practices. I was, frankly, disappointed to see our President endorse Boris Yeltsin's activities in that respect. I was pleased at least in one television interview where I saw the Secretary of State Warren Christopher hold back on the endorsement of the cancellation and elimination of the constitutional court and firing of the chief justice. I make reference to those matters, President, because I think that our policy toward Russia must be one where we exert the maximum pressure possible to see their economy move toward a free market and to see their political system move toward democracy and the recognition of the rule of law. Our strategy should also be to employ the maximum pressure that can be obtained without seeing a revolution, or President Boris Yeltsin's government toppled, or radical forces come to the fore. We must be constantly aware that there is the potential for civil unrest and perhaps even revolution in the New Independent States. But moving more directly to the pending amendment, President, the consideration of asking for collateral security in a regularized commercial context, I would submit, is very reasonable. The facts are that there is a total outstanding debt to Western banks by Russia at the present time of some $80 billion to $85 billion. Some $17 billion of that was scheduled to be repaid last year, but NIS repaid only $2 billion of the loan with the balance being rescheduled. The United States' share of the $17 billion is $1.8 billion. The administration, President, has not really focused on the scope of the Russian debt. This past week the Foreign Operations Subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee held hearings, and Ambassador at Large Strobe Talbott testified and was asked about the amount of the Soviet debt. I was a little surprised to see that Ambassador Talbott did not have those facts at his disposal. In an era where the United States is pushing to advance more money to Russia, I would think that the key administration official on Russian relations would know firmly and precisely what that debt was. I should say that Ambassador Talbott made the representation that Russia was current on its debt with respect to the Commodity Credit Corporation, which brought a response from Senator Leahy, the chairman of the Foreign Operations Subcommittee, that it was his understanding, at least until recently, that Russia is in arrears some $5 billion in payments to the CCC. The feel for the testimony by Ambassador Talbott was that there was not sufficient concern for how much money Russia owed the United States and what Russia was doing to repay these funds. President, in a context where we advance moneys to Russia and the other New Independent States, without seeking to obtain collateral security, it is a sign that we really are not very serious about collecting those moneys. Moreover, it is not that problemsome for Russia and the other New Independent States to give collateral security. Collateral will not impede the flow of cash because there are enormous mineral reserves which Russia could easily use for collateral. The estimated resource reserve for Russia and the other New Independent States is enormously impressive. In oil, the estimated reserves are 57 billion barrels, almost $1.3 trillion; in manganese some 500 million short tons, $192\1/2\ billion; in gold 8,710 metric tons, a value in excess of $105 billion; in nickel 8.1 million short tons, some $57\1/2\ billion in value; in vanadium, some 4 million metric tons, more than $30 billion in value; platinum, 6 million kilograms, almost $23\1/2\ billion in value; in silver, 50,000 metric tons, in excess of $7 billion in value; and in chromite, 129 million metric tons, almost $6\1/2\ billion in value, totaling some $1.7 trillion, almost $1.7 trillion. For the New Independent States to make a pledge of those assets in order to guarantee payment to the United States of our loans, President, I suggest is very fundamental. Every Member of this body knows the difficulties in selling foreign aid to our constituents. In my State of Pennsylvania, while there has been an economic upturn, to some extent, there are still many coal miners, textile workers, glass workers, and many other people who are unemployed. The constant question I get when I travel to my open house town meetings turns on why the United States is giving so much foreign aid when there is so much need in the United States among the poor and the unemployed for education, job training, and housing; not to mention the problems of the big cities and the problems of the farmers? This is not an easy problem to address. When I have been asked about my votes in support of the policy of the President, President Clinton, and the policy of the former President, President Bush, to make these loans to Russia and the other New Independent States, I have said that I support those loans because they are in the national self-interest of the United States. This is not a humanitarian matter. It is a matter of our national self-interest. But I would not have an answer, President, to my constituents, as to why I would support such loans if we did not make every reasonable effort to collect them. Fundamental to that effort should be the requirement of collateral security. I daresay that any of our colleagues in this Chamber or in the House would have a hard time explaining to their constituents if pointedly asked the question: Why do you vote for aid to the New Independent States without getting security, just as any lender would insist on getting security from any borrower? Any American who seeks a loan in a commercial transaction has to put up security. If that American does not put up security, that American will not get the loan. Russia and the other New Independent States have ample reserves, almost $1.7 billion, to secure these loans. It seems to me, President, that this is as close to black and white as can be found. I understand that there are some who do not wish to place any restrictions or any limitations on the aid which we are giving to Boris Yeltsin's government--to give him pretty much a free hand. I think that is a mistake, as was the administration's condoning of the dissolution of the constitutional court. It may also be a mistake not to put more pressure on Russia to move to a market economy and curtailing inflation. But there is no doubt in my mind that it is a mistake if we do not take the basic step of getting collateral security where such security will not impede the cash flow and extension of loans to Russia and the other New Independent States. That is the essence, President. And now I turn to my colleague, Senator Kerry, for whatever reply he cares to make.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is PRESIDENT and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts [Kerry] is recognized.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I have listened carefully to the comments and argument of the Senator from Pennsylvania. Because of the weather, the representatives of the State Department are not yet here, and I have not had a chance to talk with them. I do know that they oppose this. But as I was sitting and listening, a lot of questions were going through my own mind about the policy. The Senator suggests that any American who gets a loan has to put up collateral and that this is like the relationship between the husband and wife who go out and get a loan or friends somehow get a loan and it is going to be collateralized. Well, as I thought about that, and as I continue to think about it, it strikes me that that is not, in fact, what this relationship is or what it is like. It is not like a married couple in the United States that goes out and gets a loan. It is really about two people who have just met. It is about courtship. It is a question of whether or not that courtship is going to work and whether or not we are making a loan in an effort to perhaps help it work. That may be a silly analogy. I do not think it is completely off base. I think if you want to take the analogies away and think about it as a policy, the question is really not just a straight loan question. It is not just about presenting a certain amount of money and saying we have to have it collateralized. There is a policy here. There is a hope--a hope that is expressed in our support of Boris Yeltsin. And the hope is beyond the capacity to measure by mere collateral. It is a risk. This is a risk that we take in the hope that we do not have to go back and spend $300 billion on defense against a future Soviet Union again. We do not know the outcome. We do not know if they are going to make it. But if you are going to start to treat it in a strictly commercial sense, then you begin to have out here the larger policy aspects, the risks that are attended this; risks, I might add, that we have taken with many, many other countries in the past. We did not ask Germany for collateral in the Marshall Plan. We did not ask Japan for collateral as we rebuilt it after World War II. I would ask the Senator: How much collateral has Israel put up for the loans that it makes? How much collateral has Brazil put up? In fact, I ask the Senator: How many countries in the world that we give loans to do we ask for the collateral of their State resources? I think the answer is zero--zero. So we are suddenly going to say to Boris Yeltsin and the people of the former Soviet Union: We want you to be democratic. We want you to take a risk. We want you to give up the safety and the security that you felt under the hammer and the sickle and now we want you to collateralize your resources in order to make us feel good about going back to our constituencies in Pennsylvania and feeling safe as politicians to explain why we are making this risk loan. Well, how do they repay the collateral if they do not have a democratic system with a system of law that allows them to enforce it? You answer me that question. How does a country that falls short on its ability to pay the loan in the first place make good on the collateral if they are not willing to pay the loan? And what are you going to do? Go back there with an army and get the minerals out of the Earth? Are you going to go back and pull the gold out that is the collateral? The collateral is worthless if they do not succeed in becoming a democracy with a legal system that is enforceable. The collateral is not as good as the paper it is written on, which is not as good as the loan itself if they do not make it. This is a risk loan. We all understand that. I would rather make a risk loan of $1 billion to a country that wants to be democratic than to go back spending $300 billion a year on our defense budget. That is a pretty good ratio. We are squabbling about 50 years of cold war and we want to hold them up now for some collateral that is not even enforcible. It just does not make sense to me. It is a way of saying to Boris Yeltsin: We do not trust anything you say. We are really not serious about this. We are going to play politics with these loans so we can go back to our constituents and feel good. I do not know how it works. I do not know how you are going to enforce the payment on the collateral. I do not know where we have ever done this before, so I do not know how you avoid the problem of explaining to them that you are suddenly singling them out and treating them totally differently. I think it diminishes our own policy. It diminishes the 50 years that we have said to these people: ``Tear down the Berlin Wall. Free the people. Have a democracy.'' And all of a sudden, we are quibbling about $1 billion in that effort. It just does not make sense to me. It just does not make sense; unenforceable. This country of ours has often been willing to make loans that we know, because of larger interests, might or might not be repaid. We have often been pleasantly rewarded. Now, Israel does repay its loans and we can certainly look to a wonderful history of a relationship. But, as everybody knows, the loans get bigger and bigger and more and more money keeps coming out. And, in the end, some people have made the argument that it is repaid through the size of the increase of the loans. I do not want to get into sort of an examination of every country's loans. I just know that it would be an enormous mistake to suddenly single out these states that we have given such impetus to succeed, in suggesting that they, without even a legal system or enforcement or capacity to collect, start making pledges that are unenforceable. Let me point out another problem. We are making loans to private entities. We are making loans to entities that are transitioning into private status. Now, I know the Senator from Pennsylvania is a good lawyer, but I am not exactly sure how you enforce a private entity that has collateral of state resources. I am not even sure how you can have state resources collateralizing private entities. That is a crazy mix. And that is going to present a very interesting enforcement mechanism. So I think this is, in the end, leaving aside all those questions-- let us take away all the questions I raised, that I think are legitimate--there is the far more fundamental issue of whether or not at this point in time the United States wants to treat these states differently than we treat all others; whether there is sufficient reason to suddenly change this relationship at a time when things are fragile enough and when the messages that are sent may, in fact, have a detrimental impact and play into the hands of a Zhirinovsky who will say,'' You see? We told you so. We told you so. They are not willing to respect Russian nationalism. They are going to single us out. The imperialists of the West are interested in treating us in a different way and we ought to go back to a Russia where the Russian people are proud and the Russian people have superpower status. I promise you we will never be the vassals of the West. I am going to take us back to the greatness of the Russia that was.'' If you want to weaken Boris Yeltsin, it seems to me, this is one of the best ways to do it.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Feingold). The Senator from Pennsylvania.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I am a little surprised to see the Senator from Massachusetts raise a contention that I am quibbling when I am talking about repayment of billions of dollars. That hardly sounds like a quibble to me. Considering the size of the United States deficit and considering the shortfall on funding, critical funding, of programs on health, housing, job training, environmental protection, crime control, it hardly seems to me like it is a quibble when the United States is advancing $2.5 billion to the former Republics of the former Soviet Union, to ask that loans be repaid. If that is a quibble, we quibble on the floor of the Senate again and again and again and again on much, much lesser subjects.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Will my colleague yield for a question?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  As soon as I finish this thought, if it can be so denominated. We quibbled at great length yesterday over a few million dollars on an amendment offered by Senator Bumpers. We have tremendous debates over $10 million, as we should; over $50 million, as we should; over $100 million, as we should. Here, we are talking about $2.5 billion. I hardly think that is a quibble. But I would be glad to hear Senator Kerry's response on my contention that repayment of aid is not a quibble.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Let me ask my friend, is he prepared--if he is so concerned about the deficit, so concerned about the risky loans --is he prepared to put similar conditions on Egypt, Greece, Brazil, Turkey, Israel?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Absolutely.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The same conditions?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Absolutely, positively. The Senator from Massachusetts started off asking about whether I would ask for collateral from Israel, one nation very near and dear to me. And the answer is absolutely.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Has the Senator done that previously?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  What does Israel have to collateralize? Israel has a land which is significantly desert. Israel has a land which has been turned green by the sweat of its brow, by irrigation. They have turned Israel green as much from perspiration coming from the forehead as from desalinization coming from the Mediterranean. But if they have assets which could guarantee repayment of the loans, then I would be glad to ask Israel to put up the assets. But is that a realistic analogy, President, when we are talking about a country which has $1.7 trillion in minerals and metals? Is that an apt analogy? Let me return the favor of the question to Senator Kerry. What assets does Israel have to collateralize?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  See, I am not asking for it. I do not want to ask Israel to do that. Nor have we ever. The reason is that at the outset we were willing to take a risk. We wanted Israel to survive. We wanted Israel to thrive. We wanted Israel to make green out of the desert. We did not know for sure it would happen, but we wanted it to. There was no collateral. If we want to use my colleague's analogy of collateral, a husband and wife, the average American, cannot get a loan without collateral. But we gave it to Israel. We gave it to all these other countries. Of course we give it, and we should. Why should we suddenly change the policy for the emerging independent states?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  I am glad to yield for a question--President, may I have the floor?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I will be glad to ask a question----
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  I will be glad to yield for questions. I am delighted to, in fact, maybe even yield for short speeches, but not for long speeches when I have the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  That is certainly fair and I will entertain to have a dialog and not a long statement. The Senator from Pennsylvania----
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Wait a minute. The Senator took the floor just to make a quick point.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Will the Senator yield for a quick question?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Just a minute. As soon as I respond to the last question, the Senator's last comment. When the Senator from Massachusetts responds to my inquiry about what assets Israel has, he says that is not the point. I would respectfully rejoin by saying the Senator from Massachusetts is missing the point. I am prepared to see the United States adopt a policy, applicable to all, to obtain collateral security if collateral security is available. Then I come back to saying I have elaborated, enumerated, articulated assets in the former Soviet Union totaling $1.7 trillion. If we are loaning them $2.5 billion, why not get collateral security? Then the first question the Senator from Massachusetts raises is asking this Senator, ``Why not collateral security from Israel?'' And I say I am prepared to ask for collateral security. But what is the collateral security going to be? What does Israel have to give by way of collateral security? So I think it is a very, very germane point. When the Senator from Massachusetts talks about two people who have just met and this is a courtship, in a reference to two countries which have just met, the United States and Russia, and this is a courtship--I find it hard to conceive of any relationship which would be less likely to be characterized as a courtship than the relationship between Russia and the United States. We have gone through virtually an entire century, or decades, at least since 1945, as cold war adversaries with the necessity for spending tremendous sums of money--$300 billion a year as the Senator are from Massachusetts knows. This is hardly a courtship relationship. I want to be friends with Russia and the New Independent States. I want to help Russia and the New Independent States. But I am not courting Russia and the New Independent States. I am prepared to loan money to the New Independent States but I want to get it repaid. I want to take whatever steps we can to secure loan repayment. When the Senator from Massachusetts says, ``It is unenforceable. How is it going to be enforced?'' Very simply. Under the terms of this amendment when there are proceeds from the sale of these resources, we can take Russia's creditors, who owe Russia the money, and say, ``Pay us.'' That is how you enforce an agreement with collateral security. When the debtor, that is Russia, sells these assets and a third party owes Russia the money, we say to the third party, ``Russia has not paid us. You pay that money to us.'' That is the way you enforce it. And when you raise a question about how can we get enforcement where there are loans to private entities? There again, it is very fundamental. You can have a requirement that the Russian Government be a guarantor of those obligations, just as the United States is a guarantor of many advances in loans made to other parties. If they default, then the United States pays them. If Russia wants to see a loan made to a private entity in Russia, then Russia can guarantee it. Then if the borrowing private party does not repay it, it is Russia's obligation to repay it. That can be enforced when Russia sells some of these assets--and they are selling a lot of these assets on the market today--where we would go to the purchaser of the assets and say Russia has defaulted on its obligation, we call for payment. That is the way it is enforceable. I will be glad to yield for a question.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I will wait and then respond to a number of points made by the Senator.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, when the Senator from Massachusetts makes a comment that Zhirinovsky would be strengthened by this request, I would say that among the comments which Zhirinovsky has made, this one would not even get on the radar screen. We approach the Russians on arms control hardly trustingly. President Reagan put it in a nutshell when he said as to arms control, ``trust but verify.'' I would say as to loans, trust but collateralize.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, let me say to my friend, I understand and sympathize with what he is trying to do. We all sympathize with the amount of money being spent. All of us vote holding our political hearts in our hands a little bit when we vote loans or aid to other countries. We understand that. But I must say to my friend from Pennsylvania that I really believe this will not help our effort with Russia and that it is not enforceable in the manner that he has described. Second, Israel was not the first country I mentioned. I mentioned Brazil, but I mentioned Greece, Turkey, and a host of other countries. They do have assets, and I can guarantee I can find some assets in Israel. But that is not the point. The point is, do we want to go to Russia that is struggling to privatize and ask them to pledge state resources as they try to privatize? That creates a confusion and a difficulty in the privatization process that will slow down the very thing we are trying to encourage. It will seriously complicate the IMF, World Bank, and other institutions' loan process, because all of a sudden the superpower of the world, the United States, will be viewed as jumping into line with security, so to speak, with its loans and the rest of the nations that we are struggling to get to make loans will say, ``Hey, wait a minute now, the United States of America is jumping in line to protect its loans. Why should we make any loan at all, particularly if we are second in line?'' So you will have a disastrous impact on the notion that there is something bigger than just getting your money back at stake here. I am as sensitive as the Senator is to the question of getting our money back. I want to get it back, but I also want Russia to succeed in this process. I am not going to be party to a process that starts putting roadblocks in front of the very process that we are trying to encourage. It does not make sense. Moreover, the Senator has in section 2, page 3 of his amendment a direction to the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the U.S. executive directors to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Bank for Construction and Development to establish policies in opposition to the extension of credit or any guarantee with respect to credit for the purpose of assisting that state or entities in the state unless those guarantees are collateralized. So not only are we going to do this for ourselves, he wants it to be U.S. policy to do this with respect to the international lending institutions. Let me tell you something, if the world gets into a situation where states are beginning to line up according to collateral and starting to battle in some court somewhere over who is going to pay whom for the loan that the other state defaulted on, we are going to have such a mixed message and such a mishmash in the effort to enforce our foreign policy, which is difficult enough today. There is no question but that this will set back the privatization process in Russia. It will send a horrendous message of singling out these states for different treatment at the very moment we are trying to most encourage them. When Boris Yeltsin has his greatest difficulties, it will send a message to Zhirinovsky that he has one more chink in the armor and one more thing to exploit in a very, very volatile situation. I do not believe this is sensible foreign policy. I do not believe it acts in the interest of the United States. And our goal of achieving an end to 50 years of spending billions of dollars every year, which Americans, frankly, are tired of, and I think are equally as sensitive to are the $2.5 billion the Senator is talking about.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Pennsylvania.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, when the Senator from Massachusetts characterizes this amendment as a roadblock, it is hardly even a pothole. It does not impede Russia's reform effort at all. It will continue to go along very smoothly. When he talks about this being contrary to the policy of the IMF and impeding the International Monetary Fund, I wonder if he has considered the provisions of article 5, section 4 which provides, as represented to me: Funds shall also take into consideration a member's willingness to pledge as collateral security acceptable assets having sufficient value in the opinion of the funds to protect its interest and may require as a condition of waiver the pledge of such collateral security. Contrary to what the Senator from Massachusetts asserts, the IMF looks for collateral security, just as the amendment which I have offered looks for collateral security. There is an overriding sense, President, of lack of seriousness on the intent to collect these loans when we do not take a basic, prudent, reasonable step like asking for collateral security where it is available. If you talk about other countries, let us see what assets they have. If they have assets and we loan the money, then it is just basic prudence to get collateral security. I will ask the Senator from Massachusetts just a very direct question, if I may have the attention of the Senator from Massachusetts. I ask Senator Kerry a very direct question. How difficult is it for Russia, which has more than $1 trillion in minerals, to say if we do not repay the loan, you can collect on collateralized assets?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I think I have answered that in a number of differ ways. What I would like to do is lend greater credibility to the answer than just the description I have given. I think I said exactly what the problem is. The Senator says what is the problem in the country with these assets doing this. I have explained the problem. The Senator has never addressed the question of the private entity being collateralized by state resources with respect to the failure of the entire government. If the entire government fails and Zhirinovsky takes over, these collateralizations are absolutely worthless. How are you going to collect on the minerals from President Zhirinovsky?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, when the Senator from Massachusetts says I have not addressed the private loan issue, he is precisely wrong. I have addressed the private loan issue and given a conclusive answer to the effect that if the Russian Government guarantees the loan, then collateral security can be foreclosed on in the hands of the Russian Government, just like our Government can as to a direct loan to the Russian Government. But I agree with the Senator from Massachusetts that if there is a revolution and a dictator comes to power, the United States may not be able to collect on the collateral security. I agree with that, and also the fact that the United States will not go to war to collect on the loan anymore than we went to war to collect the billions of dollars which the U.S.S.R. owed us. I agree with that. But why not take advantage of an opportunity for collateral security where it exists and where we may be able to use it?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I have described, as I said, a series of problems that exist with respect to the whole effort to secure other nations in making loans. There is going to be a race to see who is first in line for what asset and so forth. It sets back the process of policy ahead of just money. But I want to, as I said, lend greater expertise than the recitation I have already presented, and what I am trying to do is secure now the testimony of Strobe Talbott, Ambassador Talbott, secretary designate, because he discussed this issue at great length in the Foreign Ops Appropriations Committee and has laid out a rationale of considerable years of expertise and, frankly, with great understanding of the current intricacies. I think that ought to be part of the record. I am trying to get that at this moment in time, and I wish to share that with my colleague.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  I thank my colleague for sharing it with me. I was there for the entire hearing and heard all of his testimony.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I want it to be part of the record.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  That is fine. I certainly would have no disagreement with that. Ambassador Talbott was not even sure as to how much money Russia owed the United States, and on the issue of collateral security his argument was about as effective as the argument of the Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I might point out if that is true, then it won.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Or it could be two times zero. President, I ask for the yeas and nays.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there a sufficient second? There appears to be a sufficient second. The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the Talbott testimony to which I previously referred be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the testimony was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Senator Specter. Let me move to another subject, since there are only a few minutes remaining, and that is the overall problem of foreign aid a very difficult one, given the tremendous budgetary problems in the United States and the tremendous deficit. And we have enormous problems everywhere, additional costs incurred with the earthquake in California, tremendous unemployment in my home state of Pennsylvania, difficulties with health care--it's an enormous litany. I offered an amendment last year that Russia ought to be required to put up collateral security for the funds which are being advanced. There is quite a large Russian debt which has not been repaid. Russia has very large reserves of gold, large reserves of oil, minerals. Why shouldn't there be collateral security, Ambassador Talbott, to guarantee the repayment of any US loans to Russia? Talbott. Generally speaking, in order for the collateralization of particularly government debt to work, it would require that the Russian government reestablish a degree of control over the allocation of resources and what happens to those resources, and that is a trend that I don't think we want to encourage. We want, overall, for Russia to move towards private sector economics and market economics. It is, of course, true that Russian debt has been an issue, both in our bilateral relations and also in Russia's relationship with the international community as a whole. However, as regards Russia's debt to the United States government, it is no longer in arrears on its responsibilities under the commodity--through the Commodity Credit Corporation, and loans per se; that is, U.S. government loans to Russia are practically nil in our overall program. We do, of course, back up loans that American companies make to Russia so that Russia can buy American exports. That's good for American jobs. And speaking of that, let me just make a very general comment in response to your question, and that is we would not ask this committee or the Congress as a whole or the American taxpayer to support one penny of assistance to Russia or the other new independent states if we did not feel that it was in the national interests of this country to do so and in the long-term interests of the American economy and American workers. And we feel very strongly that it is, for reasons that I outlined in my opening statements. Senator Specter. Well, I understand your commitment to your policy, but I must say I do not understand the major thrust of your response that we're trying to encourage control of the Russian economy and the private sector. That does not deal with the hard fact of life that the Russian government has ownership and control over vast mineral resources--coal, oil, gold, et cetera--where there could be collateral security to guarantee repayment of the loans. Atwood. If I could just briefly comment on that, our Freedom Support Act, of course, provides that we work on a grant basis with Russia. Usually the issue of collateral comes up with respect to loans. Obviously there is a cash- flow problem that Russia has at this point. It's in the extreme. Our best interest, it seems to me, is to create the markets that would enable Russia to exploit those mineral resources that you discuss and create the hard currencies that would make them a good partner. (Cross talk.) Senator Leahy. Thank you, Senator Specter. I was interested in one answer to--your answer to one of Senator Specter's questions about Russia being up to date on their CCC credits under the GSM program. Last time I checked over in the Senate Agriculture Committee, where I also spend some time now and then as chairman. I found they were about $5 billion in arrears. Is there something we missed in here during the Christmas recess? Did somebody come down the chimney and leave---- Talbott. My understanding is that they are paid up as of within the last---- Senator Leahy. Could we double check that one for the record because it is a matter of some--and I realize that prior to that was the dispute over what part was Russia's and what was the former Soviet Union's debt. But, as you know, one of the concerns I've expressed in the past is that we've used our food program, our CCC or GSM program as a form of hidden foreign aid. Last year the American taxpayers paid close to $2 billion in foreign aid to Saddam Hussein, something that most people aren't all that aware of, based on co-signing notes for him while he was building up--actually, co-signing notes for him almost right up to the day that he invaded Kuwait, so we got stuck with the paper. He took-- (inaudible word)--after the Persian Gulf War that he'd let us pay the co-signed notes, not surprising.
 
The speaker is BURNS and he says  President, I rise today in opposition to the amendment offered by Senator Specter to the Department of State reauthorization bill. This amendment will have serious, negative impacts on the aluminum industry in Montana and throughout the United States. There is merit in having the Independent States of the former Soviet Union put up collateral for their loans. But this amendment could mean the loss of jobs in Columbia Falls, MT. Currently, there is a huge inventory of aluminum in the world. This overhang has kept the price of aluminum low. The increase in Russian aluminum imports has greatly reduced the price of this commodity. This has resulted in the uncertainty of jobs in Columbia Falls. This amendment calls for the stockpiling of petroleum products, minerals, and other materials. Since the price of aluminum is set on the London Exchange, this stockpile overhang will drive the price of aluminum down even further. The mere existence of an aluminum stockpile in Russia will disrupt international markets. Its potential release into markets by the controlling government entities will cause disruption. Release of aluminum stockpiles may be the only way these countries can generate cash in order to cover their loans. And this could hurt communities in the United States, like Columbia Falls. In addition, this amendment jeopardizes the international agreement which was reached in Brussels this week. We should allow for this agreement, which will greatly benefit our domestic producers, to take effect. The jobs at Columbia Falls support families. Jeopardizing these family jobs is unacceptable. President, I yield the floor. specter amendment no. 1287
 
The speaker is MOYNIHAN and he says  President, I rise to oppose this well intentioned amendment by the distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania. Obviously, when the United States does make international loans, we should have assurances that the recipient will be able to repay them. Granting loans to countries in the former Soviet Union is in our best interest. A solvent Russia is imperative if democracy is to flourish there. Russia is in serious need of assistance. And we will regret it in the long run if we turn our backs on the reformers in that country. Adopting this measure, which singles out the countries of the former Soviet Union, will lend the appearance that the United States is seeking to gain possession of the natural resources of those countries. We do not require other countries to use collateral, but the issue is beyond that. Nationalists will argue that this provision converts loans into a Trojan horse for foreign domination, strengthening the radicals. Zhirinovsky will relish this. He will announce that the true aims of the United States toward Russia have surfaced; that now that we have crippled them we are set to plunder their resources. These are clearly not our aims and I would not want them to be misconstrued as such. Every effort must be made to encourage democratic reforms in the former Soviet Union and to assist in economic reforms. This amendment strays from that purpose and must be opposed.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I inadvertently omitted submitting the amendment on behalf of myself and the distinguished Senator from North Carolina [Helms]. I believe Senator Helms does want to present an argument, so while we are in the quorum call that will give him an opportunity to come to the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, if at any moment the managers wish to proceed--I trust that they will please indicate that. I have some remarks to make about the passing of Senator Wallace Bennett and Speaker Tip O'Neill. But I shall yield when I receive the signal from my colleagues, the floor managers. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, I was saddened to learn over the Christmas holidays that one of my father's best friends, a man whom he was privileged to serve with in the Senate, a man of the West, Senator Wallace Bennett, passed away. My father, Milward Simpson, and Wallace Bennett had a great deal in common. Most importantly to them, they were honored and beloved and respected by their constituents, whom they loved. They shared a rare friendship. And it is just as unique and rare that their sons have the privilege of serving in this body together, and share the same close friendship as our fathers did before us. Senator Bob Bennett is a lovely friend of mine. And I think all of us who see him and have come to know him in this place realize what a fine addition he is to the U.S. Senate. It is wonderful to have his presence. Senator Bennett, Senior, was born in 1898. My father was born in 1897. Senator Bennett, Senior, attended the public schools in Salt Lake City and attended the University of Utah. My father attended the public schools in about six communities in Wyoming. He said they never could catch up with him long enough to educate him. Then my father attended the University of Wyoming. Both were veterans of the First World War. Upon returning from service, Senator Bennett was a high school principal. He later went into private business as a paint manufacturer. In 1949 he was elected president of the National Association of Manufacturers. He was elected as a Republican to the U.S. Senate in 1950. He served until his resignation in December 1974. My father came to the Senate in 1962 to fulfill an unexpired term of Senator Joe Hickey. My father retired in 1966. They both served on the Banking Committee. When Senator Bennett retired, he was the ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, the second ranking Republican on the Banking Committee, and the vice chairman of the Committee on the Standards of Conduct. Senator Wallace Bennett had a very well deserved reputation as a compassionate conservative, and there is nothing mutually exclusive about both of those adjectives. I am very proud to serve with his son who shares those same characteristics of the father. They also share a marvelous sense of good humor, for which Wallace Bennett will always be remembered. Senator Bennett is survived by his delightful life partner, Frances. They were married for 71 years. They had 5 children, 29 grandchildren, and 68 great grandchildren. He contributed a great deal to his State of Utah and to our Nation. It is with a great deal of love that the sympathies of my wife, Ann, and my mother, Lorna and my entire family go out to my very good friend, Bob Bennett, to Joyce, and to the entire family of this splendid man. ____________________
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, many have recently expressed their tributes to Thomas P. ``Tip'' O'Neill, Jr. I want to join with so many of my colleagues to express the heartfelt loss we all feel with the passing of ``Tip'' O'Neill. His passing earlier this month at the age of 81 left a large, gaping hole in the fabric of this Nation, for he was an incredible man who was blessed with a rare and inimitable sense for politics. Tip knew a lot about politics and he practiced what he preached. He learned quickly--and he was careful to never make the same mistake twice. My good friend, Bob Dole called him the Congressman's Congressman. Tip had great friends on both sides of the aisle. You might fight him tooth and nail because you disagreed with him but you always respected him because you knew he was fighting for what he believed in--and for this institution he loved so much. In thinking of Tip's life, I was reminded of one of my favorite poems--the magical ``If'' by Rudyard Kipling. When Kipling wrote, ``If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, or walk with kings--nor lose the common touch'' he surely had in mind someone like Tip O'Neill. He could talk to anyone--and he gave everyone the same courtesy, respect, and regard--no matter their position in life. He spoke to the President with the same honesty and directness that he addressed everyone else. He didn't pull his punches for anyone--even when his outspokenness was seen by some as troublesome. I have learned that lesson myself. He was just never impressed by a title--he was more concerned with how to make things better back home. He had come to Washington to serve his constituents and he did that as their loyal friend in Washington for many, many years. My good friend Paul Tsongas, a former Massachusetts Senator, said it so well when he remarked that the passing of Tip O'Neill was a sad day, ``But it's wonderful that you could celebrate a life like this.'' Indeed, a wonderful life, beautifully lived is what we have to celebrate. I think we can all close our eyes and recall the remarkable presence that was Tip O'Neill--the floppy white hair, the rosy cheeks, and the big ever-present cigar. He loved sports and he never missed a chance to take in a boxing match when he could--unless, of course, a good hand of poker or a game of golf was to be had. He had a wonderful feel for politics as sport and he also had a delightful sports analogy for any political problem. He once told President Carter to be like a boxer and ``keep your left hand high'' to remind him that politics is, indeed, a full contact sport. Tip O'Neill never saw politics as an opportunity to amass a great deal of wealth--he saw politics as public service. When he retired from the House he was a man of relatively modest circumstances. The wealth he had truly attained was the wellspring of love that had developed for him as a public servant. His death occurred while I was with a Senate delegation led by Senator Bennett Johnston, traveling in China, Vietnam, Thailand, and Indonesia. I was unable to attend the services. Had I been anywhere in the continental United States, I would have done so. I had just talked to ``Tip'' over the Thanksgiving holiday. I called him, which I would do from time to time, to share a new story or hear one of his. That was always a delightful experience. And he could tell a story. I enjoy that too. It was always a very special occasion. We all remember his motto, that ``all politics is local.'' That is his legacy, and the title of his last book. It seems fitting that the man who placed such a premium on local politics--having worked his way up from the local wards to a position of national prominence--has left us such a fascinating guidebook for the rules of politics and, more importantly, for the rules of interpersonal relationships. For what more is politics in reality than that? He was a master in his relationships with people from all walks of life. I have a particular fondness for him. An example of his wonderful character came up when I was working on the illegal immigration bill. We passed an illegal immigration bill in the U.S. Senate for the first time in 30 years, by a very fine, strong, bipartisan vote. It went to the House, and it just laid there. People came up to me and said, ``You know, you are new here, but unless you go to work over there, you are never going to see that bill again.'' I said, ``Well, I have been in the State legislature and just assumed that my good counterparts on the other side would pick it up and move it,'' especially since we have had some joint hearings. And, of course my finest friend and counterpart was a Democrat named Ron Mazzoli. It was called the Simpson-Mazzoli bill. And Ron was ready to move it. Peter Rodino, another great friend, Chairman Rodino, was ready to move it. But ``Tip'' was not ready to move it because he did not know exactly all of the aspects of it. So one day I screwed my courage up to the sticking point and I called him. I said, ``I would like to visit with you, no staff, just me.'' He said, ``Come on over, cowboy.'' I went over a couple of weeks later. He rolled up his sleeves, and punched a cigar into his mouth, and he said, ``Tell me what this turkey is.'' I said, ``Well, let me describe it to you. I want to do it without any staff here because I know the issue.'' He said, ``Well, teach me.'' So after about half hour, he got up, brought in the remarkable staff person named Ari Weiss, who was truly one of the most unique and brilliant staff persons I have known. Of course, that was the type of person ``Tip'' surrounded himself with. He said, ``I don't have all the answers but I have people around me who do.'' He brought in Ari Weiss, and he described to him exactly what he felt he wanted to do. He said, ``I want to support this. But it is a political year. I am going to take a lot of flak.'' I said, ``Yeah, you are.'' He said, ``I tell you what I am going to do, Simpson. I want to put this bill on the floor sometime before the date of--'' I think it was October 5--``and I don't want you to say a single word about it to anyone. And if you do, and I hear about it, you will never see that bill again in the whole history of the legislature.'' I said, ``That is fair enough for me,'' and therefore the only way to do that was to not tell anybody, including my staff or my wife. I have never hidden anything from her in our 40 years of a wonderful life. But I thought, ``I cannot let that one out.'' I never said a word to anybody. And then, I think the date was somewhere in late September or October, the announcement was made that the immigration bill would be considered on the floor of the House, which absolutely caused chaos in the Democratic Party, because Fritz Mondale and Gary Hart were both running for the Presidency. Gary Hart was opposed to it and using it to obtain some Hispanic support. Fritz did not want to deal with it. I think it was Fritz who called ``Tip,'' but that will remain somewhere out in the rest of the vapors for others to report; but somewhere along the line ``Tip'' told some representative of Fritz Mondale's: ``Look, you run for President; I will run the House.'' And the bill came up and the bill did not survive. But the promise was made and the promise was kept, and from that came a truly rich relationship with a most unique person. Tip's wife, Millie, and Ann worked together on various causes. I think people forget that that is what makes this system work. A conservative Republican from Wyoming in the Senate and a liberal Democrat from Massachusetts in the House had what I cherished as a very intimate and personal relationship. I shall miss him greatly. I pay tribute and Ann and I give our love and sympathy to dear Millie and all of the wonderful O'Neills. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that Senator Roth be added as a cosponsor to the pending Specter amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is BAUCUS and he says  President, we have heard a great deal about the foreign policy and finance implications of this amendment. Senator Kerry has raised some very good points. But the fact is, its passage would also threaten American jobs and the global environment. It would hurt Russian reform, it would hurt the American economy, it would cripple our antidumping efforts and it will cost jobs across America. While the Senator from Pennsylvania has the best of intentions, this is a bad amendment and I hope the Senate will not accept it. Threat to Jobs in America The most basic effect of the Specter Amendment would be to encourage Russia to churn out vast amounts of commodities. Russia will create mountainous stockpiles of goods--in the amendment's words, it will have to create ``reserves of petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities.'' That is, it will create mountains of just about anything Russia can produce at all. These stockpiles are not just going to lie still. No way. Sooner or later they will topple down upon the international markets and crush them. They will flood the markets in aluminum, energy, wood, copper, steel, petroleum, and many other goods. In fact, if we pass this amendment, we would encourage Russia to pursue a policy of dumping in almost every industry. The result will be to depress the price of these goods on the international and American markets, close plants, and throw Americans out of work. If you have worried, say, about what dumping of steel does to U.S. jobs, think about what will happen when you have a teetering, toppling Mount Everest of stockpiled steel in Russia. The aluminum industry is another example, and one as important to Montana as steel is to Pennsylvania. It has already lost about 7,000 jobs due to the existing flood of dumped aluminum from Russia. The administration has worked very hard and very effectively to address this problem. And just last week we got an agreement in Brussels to reduce Russian aluminum production by 500,000 a year. It is the American aluminum industry's guarantee of survival. Nothing less. This amendment would destroy that agreement and encourage a vast new flood of aluminum. The same will be true in many other industries. In short, this is a killer amendment--it might not kill the bill, but it sure will kill American jobs. threat to reform in russia Ironically, the Specter amendment would threaten reform in Russia as much as it threatens jobs in America. The Soviet Union's economic policy involved subsidizing inefficient, outdated, and environmentally destructive factories; unlimited production without regard to cost; and emphasis on heavy industry at the expense of consumers. These policies are what caused Russia's economic problems. The Specter amendment would be a huge incentive to the Russian Government to go right back to them. With economic reform already in trouble, that is the last thing we want to do. It is disastrous foreign policy. If you want to support Russian reform, you would be better off doing nothing at all--no aid, no diplomatic support, just stick your head in the sand and do nothing-- than to support this amendment. As Senator Kerry says, you give a blow to President Yeltsin; you encourage Russian neofascists--and you also give a huge boost to opponents of economic reform and environmental protection. Finally, this is a bad way to decide an important policy question. This amendment has appeared without hearings, without forethought and, I might say, without much of anything. Suddenly, it is here. There are not many staff here today because of the bad weather conditions. Nobody has had a chance to look at this and think it through more than any of us already have. I think Senator Kerry has made some very good points as to why this should not be adopted and whether it could even be enforced. I am sure if we consider it through hearings, many more questions would indicate more problems that we have not already thought of. In sum, I think this amendment should not be passed. It is dangerous to American jobs, dangerous to Russian reforms, and undermines American antidumping laws in the world commodity markets. I urge the Senate to oppose it.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, let me disagree strenuously with the assertion of the Senator from Montana that this amendment has been offered without forethought or without notice. This amendment has had considerable thought, analysis, and research by more than this Senator and is very similar to an amendment which was offered on July 2, 1992. In addition, this issue was raised directly with Ambassador Lawrence Strobe Talbott on Monday of this week, 4 days ago, and was discussed at the Foreign Operations hearing. Beyond that, there has been notice to the managers of this amendment, and the amendment was filed 2 days ago. So it hardly is a surprise this morning at 9:30 that I have arrived to offer this amendment. By way of further reply to what the Senator from Montana has had to say, the U.S. aluminum smelters, an industry very important to the Senator from Montana, as he articulates, has been in deep distress. I ask unanimous consent that this material be printed as an exhibit at the conclusion of my statement.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. (See exhibit 1.)
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  This graph shows the tremendous impact on aluminum manufacturing around the country, including Columbia Falls in Montana, of massive Russian sales of aluminum, in what I think would be accurately categorized as dumping. There is no reason to expect that there will be any additional production or stockpiling of metals as a result of this amendment because the collateral would come from metals that are already being dumped or stockpiled. This amendment has the long-range effect of guaranteeing, to every extent possible, that loans will be repaid by having these resources serve as collateral for new bilateral and multilateral loans. So when the Senator from Montana cries wolf, I think there is no basis for it. In fact, the existing practices have resulted in tremendous dislocation and loss of employment all across this country in the aluminum industry, including the plant in Columbia Falls, MT. This amendment will help to remove some of aluminum from the market. I thank the Chair. Exhibit 1 United States Aluminum Smelters Company, Location, Capacity in Tonnes Per Year Alumax, Eastalco Frederick, 174,000. Stanwich, Ravenswood, 165,000 ALCAN, Sebree, 180,000. ALCOA, Badin, 115,000. ALCOA, Alcoa, Tenn., 205,000. Consolidated Aluminum, New Johnsonville, 146,000 (closed). Alumax, Mt. Holley, 182,000. Revere, Scotsboro, 117,000 (closed). Reynolds, Listerhill, 183,000 (closed). Kaiser, Chalmette, 260,000 (closed). Reynolds, Corpus Christi, 114,000 (closed). ALCOA, Pt. Comfort, 159,000 (closed). Reynolds, Lake Charles, 36,000 (closed). ALCOA, Rockdale, 320,000. ALCOA, Anderson County, 15,000 (closed). Reynolds, Arkadelphia, 68,000 (closed). Reynolds, Jones Mill, 125,000 (closed). Noranda, New Madrid, 204,000. Northwest Al, The Dalles, 62,000. Reynolds, Troutdale, 121,000 (idled). Vanalco, Vancouver, 115,000. Reynolds, Longview, 204,000. Columbia Alum, Goldendale, 168,000. Alumax Intalco, Ferndale, 272,000. ALCOA, Wenatchee, 220,000. Kaiser Maxxam, Mead, 200,000. Columbia Falls Alum, Columbia Falls, 168,000. ALCOA, Warrick, 300,000. National Southwire, Hawesville, 185,000. Reynolds, Massena, 123,000. ORMET, Hannibal, 250,000. ALCOA, Massena, 125,000. SUMMARY: 4,031,000 MT Operating 75%, 22 Smelters.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I would ask unanimous consent that the amendment of the Senator from Pennsylvania be temporarily set aside merely to permit the Senator from Delaware to lay down his amendment, begin to speak on it, and I would ask the Senator from Delaware if at the appropriate moment we know that Senators are more or less here, we would then interrupt and proceed to a vote on the amendment of the Senator from Pennsylvania.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  If my colleague will yield, I do not know if he heard my statement earlier. The distinguished senior Senator from North Carolina [Helms] wishes to present an argument in support of the amendment, so we ought to arrange our schedule to give Senator Helms opportunity to do that.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I did not hear that. I apologize to the Senator. In that case, I ask unanimous consent that we simply set aside temporarily the amendment of the Senator from Pennsylvania.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from Delaware. Amendment No. 1288 (Purpose: To state the sense of the Senate concerning Japan and Germany becoming permanent members of the U.N. Security Council.)
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report the amendment. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from Delaware [Roth] proposes an amendment numbered 1288.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: At the appropriate point, insert the following: The Senate finds that in the post-Cold War period, the international community expects the United Nations to play a larger role, particularly in peacekeeping operations that may, on occasion, require the use of force against determined aggressors; That in the past five years the United Nations has engaged in more peacekeeping operations than the preceding forty, That the Security Council is the U.N. body chiefly responsible for matters of peace and security; That the United Nations structure and the Security Council's roster of permanent members have remained largely unchanged since the United Nations was founded almost half a century ago; That Japan and Germany, as the world's second and third largest economies, respectively, have attained levels of global reach and influence equal to or surpassing current permanent members of the Security Council; That both Japan and Germany have announced their desire to gain permanent membership in the Security Council; That any country accorded permanent membership must be capable of fulfilling the responsibilities of such status, including participation in any U.N. military operations; That according permanent membership to nations not capable of carrying out these responsibilities will allow those countries to play a central role in shaping U.N. peacekeeping opertions which could endanger the lives of American and other troops, but in which their own forces could play no part; That, currently, in both Japan and Germany the prevailing view is that each country is prohibited from carrying out all the responsibilities that permanent membership entails and appears reluctant to make the changes necessary to gain those capabilities; That in Japan's case, further reconciliation with its Asian neighbors who suffered during the World War II period is recommended Now, therefore, it is the sense of the Senate that: (1) In principle, the United States should support both Japan and Germany in their wish to gain permanent membership in the United Nations Security Council; but (2) Neither Japan nor Germany should be admitted as permanent members until they are capable of discharging the full range of responsibilities accepted by all current permanent members of the Security Council.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  President, I have sent to the desk an amendment concerning Germany and Japan and their quest for permanent membership in the U.N. Security Council. My amendment states that, in principle, the U.S. should support this initiative, but it also states that these countries should not be admitted as permanent members until these nations have rendered themselves capable of discharging the responsibilities consonant with permanent Security Council membership. It is undeniable that, in the 1990's, Germany and Japan enjoy greater global economic influence than some current permanent Security Council members, and it is fitting that Security Council membership should reflect the global distribution of economic and political influence, particularly if we are supportive of enhancing the United Nations overall effectiveness. But other circumstances need to be considered in addition to Germany and Japan's economic potency. In particular, we need to consider the unique domestic positions of both governments. I draw the attention of my colleagues to the fact that, under current circumstances, neither Germany nor Japan is capable of carrying out all of the obligations that permanent Security Council membership entails and neither country appears willing to confront this fundamental problem in order to obtain that membership. Neither the Japanese constitution nor the German basic law specifically prohibits the participation of German and Japanese forces in U.N. peacekeeping operations. In fact, the framers of the Japanese constitution have said specifically that it was not their intention to preclude the Japanese from participating in U.N. defense arrangements. However, both nations, both Germany and Japan, have traditionally interpreted their constitutions as, indeed, containing such prohibitions. Consequently, both nations assert that they cannot participate fully in so-called U.N. ``blue helmet'' noncombat peacekeeping operations, let alone in the more muscular peacemaking type of operations against determined aggressors which, for better or worse, may become more typical of future U.N. operations. Obviously, a sovereign nation has every right to interpret its constitution as it wishes. But if that interpretation effectively prevents the nation in question from carrying out major responsibilities of permanent Security Council membership, then I question whether under these circumstances the United States should support its elevation to permanent member status. I put it to my colleagues: Should the United States assist Germany and Japan to become permanent Security Council members when this will enable them to cast vital votes in favor of U.N. military operations, operations which could easily endanger the lives of United States servicemen, when neither the Japanese nor German armed forces can take part in those operations under the current interpretation of their respective constitutions? Personally, I can imagine few speedier ways to damage our relations with both countries and to tear the Security Council apart. For their part, Germany and Japan should recognize how their own positions would be undermined under such circumstances. One need only recall the outcry which arose in response to both nations' failures to supply personnel for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm to understand the depth of feeling that would arise in this and other nations under these circumstances. With power and influence must come responsibility. Any Japanese or German attempt to sidestep this fundamental truth will place them in a most undesirable position. I am convinced that neither Tokyo nor Bonn, as yet, fully comprehends this indissoluble link between global power and influence on the one hand and responsibility on the other. Otherwise, why are they pressing for permanent Security Council membership before rendering themselves capable of fulfilling the responsibilities attendant upon that membership? For example, Prime Minister Hosokawa has informed the Japanese Diet that his government will never authorize the nation's self-defense forces to join the military phase of any peacekeeping operation. Likewise, German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel told the General Assembly that Bonn's contribution to the United Nations ``will continue to be of a mainly political and economic nature,'' even on the occasions when the United Nations must resort to force. I believe that this body must make its position clear to Germany and Japan and delineate precisely what we expect of each if they are to merit our support in their quest for permanent Security Council membership. That is what this sense-of-the-Senate amendment does. I also believe that the Japanese and German Governments must begin to examine the implications of their actual elevation to permanent Security Council membership status and they must explain those implications to their electorates. In an era in which the United Nations is assuming a larger role in global affairs, it is crucial we all understand, and openly discuss, how the United Nations core authorities over peace and security may be affected by changes in the Security Council. And in the case of Japan, which is only now coming to terms with its behavior in World War II, that discussion must take into account the very serious concerns of its Asian neighbors. I stress again, President, I have long favored the principle of making Germany and Japan permanent Security Council members. Their inclusion will increase the council's effectiveness by making it more reflective of the real global distribution of economic power. But before the two nations can enter into permanent membership, Tokyo and Bonn must first eliminate the self-imposed barriers which prevent them from meeting all of the responsibilities of that membership. Once Germany and Japan have removed those barriers, both nations will deserve our full support in their efforts to secure permanent seats in the United nations Security Council. President, I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, this may not be the time to fully debate this and it may be that we do not need an enormous debate. I would just like to perhaps enter into a colloquy with my colleague to further explore a little bit where we are going. I appreciate his cooperation with respect to a couple of the phrases in this amendment. I want to make sure that in this amendment we send the correct message, not the wrong message, to our friends, both the Japanese and the Germans. I think we are in sync, but I want to make sure that we are. It is my understanding of the amendment of the Senator from Delaware that it is made with the full understanding that, No. 1, you do not have to be a member of the Security Council to participate in a peacekeeping operation nor, in fact, does a member of the Security Council automatically have to participate in a peacekeeping operation. The Senator approaches this amendment with that understanding and view; correct?
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  Absolutely; that is my understanding.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  And the Senator also is both aware and I know grateful for the fact that both Japan and Germany have recently sent troops to participate in peacekeeping operations--Germany in Somalia with 1,500 troops, and Japan in Cambodia where they provided significant assistance.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  That is correct. I would point out, of course, in a very limited sense. The Japanese participated in road building and other matters which were supportive of that effort, but not in the front-line area.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  However, two Japanese were killed in Cambodia in this effort. There was considerable concern in Japan about this and the Japanese were steadfast and in fact are owed great gratitude for their significant efforts in helping to bring about that peace effort.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  I looked upon their actions in Cambodia as a very important step forward, severely circumscribed by the legislation that made it possible but, nevertheless, a step in the right direction.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Let me clarify my own comments so the record is clear. The Japanese sent police to Cambodia, not troops, so we are clear on the distinction.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  That is correct.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The Senator is directing, I think, an appropriate question, important question, about what kind of larger role both of these countries are willing to play and could play within the context of a larger world responsibility. I know the Senator is extremely mindful of the sensitivity of questions with other allies in Europe about what kind of force might emerge in Germany. So I want to make it clear, or at least elicit for the record an understanding, that the Senator is not oblivious to that sensitivity but rather feels that Germany's responsibility ought to be its capacity to fully participate in peacekeeping but not necessarily to emerge in a way that somehow disturbs other relationships in either the NATO alliance or even the European Community.
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  I would say to the distinguished chairman, you have the same sensitivity in Germany in respect to her neighbors--in the case of Germany, as I said--that we do in respect to Japan and its neighbors. What we are really talking about here, and all we are talking about, is the capability of those two countries participating in U.N. efforts. Nothing more; nothing less.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I think that clarification is an important clarification and I appreciate it. With that in mind, President, we are prepared to accept the amendment with the changes made by the Senator. I appreciate the colloquy.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Daschle). Is there further debate? Hearing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment of the Senator from Delaware. The amendment (No. 1288) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the amendment was agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to. Amendment No. 1287
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, what is the regular order?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Chair will inform the Senate that the question now recurs on the amendment offered by the Senator from Pennsylvania No. 1287.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I thank the Chair. President, it is my understanding the Senator from North Carolina would like to address that amendment. I ask unanimous consent that, after the comments of the Senator from North Carolina, I be permitted 3 minutes to respond, at which point a vote would occur on that amendment to be followed by a vote--I withdraw that unanimous consent request.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from North Carolina.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I am grateful to the able Senator from Pennsylvania for offering this amendment. I am honored to be a cosponsor of it. In fact, the Senator from North Carolina offered a very similar amendment during the May 13, 1992 Foreign Relations Committee markup of the Freedom Support Act. My amendment, at that time, was defeated. But I suspect that, given recent events in Russia, the Senate may want to take a second look at requiring collateral for loans made by the United States Government using American taxpayers' money to the former Soviet Union. Senator Specter's proposal is just plain common sense. I must say in all candor that I have never understood why the American taxpayers must provide collateral in order to secure their loans to buy their houses or their automobiles but that it is not necessary for Russia with its vast resources to put up any collateral at all. I say to the Senator from Pennsylvania that I have been fussing about this for a long time. I had a conversation about it with Yeltsin when he was here, and I did not detect that he disagreed with me because it was translated that he understood exactly what I was saying to him. So I, for the life of me, cannot understand why our Government or this Senate or any Senator can oppose the amendment of the Senator from Pennsylvania. The United States has provided billions--billions--of dollars in loans to the former Soviet Republics in the last couple of years. Yet the American taxpayers have received nothing more than promises and handshakes as collateral. There is no excuse for this. I would like anybody who opposes the amendment of the Senator from Pennsylvania to go with me to North Carolina and let me hear him try to explain it to the taxpayers down there; or to Massachusetts, for that matter. I will be glad to go with the Senator from Massachusetts to his State and hear any explanation of opposition to the amendment. The former Soviet Republics have the richest reserves of minerals and oil and gas in the entire world. This is an incontrovertible fact. Nobody can contest it. The Specter amendment may cause some wailing and gnashing of teeth down at Foggy Bottom and perhaps at the Treasury Department by the bureaucrats who are not interested in protecting the American taxpayers. But Senator Specter is proposing that our Government treat foreign countries, in this case Russia, just like the economic system in this country treats the American taxpayers who furnish the money that is given away or loaned to the Soviet Union and other countries around the world. In any case, the Specter amendment gives the American taxpayers a better chance of getting paid back for the billions of dollars they have lent to the former Soviet Republics. I personally wish the Specter amendment had been in effect since 1946 when the foreign aid program began. This Government would be in far better shape and would be in a far better negotiating position with nations which took the money furnished by the American taxpayers. This money was borrowed from, and the debt was placed on, the American taxpayers. In so many cases these nations turned their backs on the United States after having received billions upon billions of dollars from the U.S. Treasury. I will recite a story that I have recited on the floor a number of times. About 10 or 12 years ago, I had an inquiry from a friend of mine in North Carolina about foreign aid. He, first of all, wanted to know how long it had been going on. I could answer that quickly--it started in 1946. He asked me if these countries that receive foreign aid ever pay it back. And I said, in one or two or three rare instances, yes. But in the main, no. Then he asked the devastating question. He asked me how much the foreign aid program had cost me and the other American taxpayers. I could not answer the question. I said, I am going to call down to the State Department. I am going to call to the Agency for International Development. I will get the figure and maybe I can call you right back. I called down there. What do you know, they do not know--or at least they said they do not know. Nowhere in this Government is there a total, a specific total, of how much the foreign aid programs cost the American taxpayers, particularly when asked on the basis that I asked them. Since we have been running a deficit every year for decades except one or two, I assumed that we were giving away money that we had in fact borrowed. So I asked my staff. I called them in and I said, I want you to do whatever is necessary to get some sort of total on what the foreign aid bill has cost. And I want you to start off with the interest rate the first year and factor that in with the amount of money that was given away. And then the next year, get the interest rate and factor that in, and roll it over, and do that up to the present time. That was 10 or 12 years ago. We did not have a computer. We had no way to handle all of that arithmetic. So the Library of Congress agreed to do it for us. I never will forget when my staff came in with the computer printout, about so thick. I looked at the total down there, and it was in excess of $2 trillion, when you factor in the interest of the borrowed money. I said, this cannot be. I said, go back and ask the Library of Congress to run those figures again. They ran the figures again and it still came out to over $2 trillion. So that is what Senator Specter is talking about. This is a modest beginning when you think about it. But it ought to be a policy. When we make a loan we ought to have collateral, except in rare instances where the President makes certification and the Congress is satisfied with some other arrangement. Again, I commend the Senator from Pennsylvania. I support his amendment. And I inquire, has he asked for the yeas and nays on the amendment? I thank the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I will respond very quickly and then proceed to move to table, according to the agreement between us here. I appreciate the Senator's offer to come to Massachusetts and talk to folks there. If he is going to make that offer to me, I am afraid my good friend is going to be very busy traveling to about 50 States in the country, because most of our colleagues in the Senate, at least one from each State, have a strong feeling this would be a mistake. Why is this a mistake? I do not disagree with my friend at all that we must be deeply concerned about the deficit. And all of us are. I think we are today. But if in fact we ought to be doing this as a policy, we certainly should not be singling out one country at a critical juncture in its developmental stage into democracy against all other countries. If this is indeed good policy and it is something we ought to be doing, then we ought to embrace this as the policy and do it simultaneously for all countries with some understanding about the multilateral impact of doing it on the international lending institutions and on other countries. But to single out Russia at this particular moment, with all of the volatility of Zhirinovsky and nationalism and the ingredients of that most recent election and the difficulties that the democracy effort faces, would be to send not just a bad message, but a damaging, negative, dangerous message. It is just one more chink that plays into the Zhirinovsky box of arguments. More importantly, it is unenforceable; it cannot make a difference if the Government fails. If this Government that is working to set up a market that will repay these loans that has strong democratic institutions, strong private institutions and they get their market reforms, that is your best shot at getting repaid. But if you do things that undermine this Government, then you are going to guarantee that there is an alternative government there and your pieces of paper are going to be just that, pieces of paper. You are never going to be able to collect the collateral. A government that cannot repay these loans is a government that also cannot give you the collateral. This is a step that almost helps make that a self- fulfilling prophecy. It is bad foreign policy; it is bad international economic policy. I strongly commend to my colleagues that we reject it, as we have previously. President, I move to table the amendment of the Senator.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Will the Senator resist for just 2 or 3 minutes?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  If I can ask my colleague--we have an agreement with colleagues who have planes to meet that we are going to start a vote. If we can tighten it--I do not want to deprive him because I just said something.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  I will conclude in 3 minutes.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Does the Senator withhold the motion?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Could the Senator make it 2 minutes?
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  Yes.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I withhold my motion.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, the final comments I want to add to the Record are that there was a question as to the citation of article 5, section 4 that I had referred to earlier. That comes from the articles of agreement to the International Monetary Fund which says: ``Funds shall also take into consideration a member's willingness to pledge as collateral security assets acceptable,'' and so forth. That demonstrates that there is nothing new; that it has been accepted international monetary policy for a long time. By further reference to the arguments made by the Senator from Montana, Baucus, I refer to an article from the Financial Times by Kenneth Gooding, of January 6, 1994 saying: Support is growing for an ingenious potential solution to the world aluminum supply crisis that would involve surplus metal from the Commonwealth of Independent States being used as collateral for U.S. Government-guaranteed loans to the CIS. I ask unanimous consent that this article be printed in the Record to save time. There being no objection, the article was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: [From the Financial Times, Jan. 6, 1994] Collateral Plan May Solve CIS Aluminium Problem (By Kenneth Gooding) Support is growing for an ingenious potential solution to the world aluminium supply crisis that would involve surplus metal from the Commonwealth of Independent States being used as collateral for US government-guaranteed loans to the CIS. ``This would remove the excess supply from the market, provide hard currency to the CIS, and, with the stipulation that a portion of the funds be used to upgrade CIS smelters, would improve the physical environment surrounding the smelters, which has been devastated by years of neglect,'' suggests Eli Epstein, chief executive of Calcined Coke Corporation, the New York-based concern that formulated the proposals. It would also do away with the need for the world-wide smelter production cuts now under consideration--and the associated unemployment--or restrictions on imports from the CIS of the kind at present in force in the European Union. Calco, a big supplier to the international aluminium industry, has discussed its ideas with members of the US Congress and representatives of the US Export-Import Bank as well as other industry members and the response has been ``encouraging,'' says Epstein. He hopes that the Calco proposals will be on the agenda when trade representatives from the world's main aluminum- producing countries and the industry meet in Brussels on January 18 and 19 for a third round of talks about the crisis arising from the sudden surge in CIS exports following the collapse of the former Soviet Union. This has pushed up aluminum stocks and driven down prices to a level where most smelters are suffering operating losses. Calco estimates that the present value of the CIS surplus aluminum stocks, about 700,000 tonnes, is roughly $700m. It suggests that the entire surplus be securely warehoused and becomes collateral for the US government guarantee of loans made to the CIS by financial institutions. Loans provided to the CIS would substantially exceed the value of the stocks but the collateral would reduce the risk attached to these loans and support the US commitment to helping the CIS economically. Surplus stock would be held off the market until it could comfortably be absorbed. After a time, aluminum demand, which is growing at an annual 1.5 to 2.5 percent, should catch up with supply and allow for the release of stocks into the market in a controlled fashion. ``The substantial influx of capital to the CIS will trigger economic development which should increase its domestic demand for primary aluminum,'' Epstein points out. If loans were repaid the aluminum would be returned to the CIS at planned intervals and if there was a default the metal would be sold gradually at predetermined price levels. Epstein suggests that if the scheme is implemented, ``the aluminum industry worldwide would benefit from stable pricing and employment. The CIS would have a source of hard currency and be able to reduce the environmental impact of its inefficient smelters. Using the inventory as collateral would reduce the risk of default on the loans and, with import restrictions unnecessary, free trade relationships are maintained.
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  President, the final matter is that this boils down to a very simple proposition, that is, whether we ought to take a step which is reasonably calculated to guarantee repayment of billions of dollars in loans from the United States to Russia. It may not work, but it may work. I believe that because our constituents, the taxpayers of America who have to give security when they borrow money and who are ultimately going to be burdened with whatever debts the United States undertakes which are not repaid by the former Soviet Republics, that this is an amendment which ought to be adopted. I thank the Chair and yield back the remainder of my time.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to table, and I ask for the yeas and nays.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there a sufficient second? There is a sufficient second. The yeas and nays were ordered.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The question is on agreeing to the motion to lay on the table amendment No. 1287. The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk called the roll.
 
The speaker is FORD and he says  I announce that the Senator from Hawaii [Inouye], the Senator from Washington [Murray], and the Senator from Nevada [ Reid] are necessarily absent.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  I announce that the Senator from Mississippi [ Cochran], the Senator from Kansas [Kassebaum], the Senator from Arizona [McCain], and the Senator from South Dakota [Pressler] are necessarily absent.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Are there any other Senators in the Chamber desiring to vote? The result was announced--yeas 60, nays 33, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 11 Leg.] YEAS--60 Akaka Baucus Biden Bingaman Boren Boxer Bradley Breaux Bryan Bumpers Burns Byrd Chafee Coats Danforth Daschle DeConcini Dodd Exon Feingold Feinstein Ford Glenn Gorton Graham Harkin Hatfield Heflin Jeffords Johnston Kennedy Kerrey Kerry Kohl Lautenberg Leahy Levin Lieberman Lugar Mathews McConnell Metzenbaum Mikulski Mitchell Moseley-Braun Moynihan Nunn Pell Pryor Riegle Robb Rockefeller Sarbanes Sasser Shelby Simon Wallop Warner Wellstone Wofford NAYS--33 Bennett Bond Brown Campbell Cohen Conrad Coverdell Craig D'Amato Dole Domenici Dorgan Durenberger Faircloth Gramm Grassley Gregg Hatch Helms Hollings Hutchison Kempthorne Lott Mack Murkowski Nickles Packwood Roth Simpson Smith Specter Stevens Thurmond NOT VOTING--7 Cochran Inouye Kassebaum McCain Murray Pressler Reid So the motion to lay on the table the amendment (No. 1287) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote by which the motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is BREAUX and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to. Vote on Amendment No. 1286
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The question is on agreeing to the amendment of the Senator from Colorado [Brown]. On this question, the yeas and nays have been ordered, and the clerk will call the roll.
 
The speaker is FORD and he says  I announce that the Senator from Hawaii [Inouye], the Senator from Washington [Murray], and the Senator from Nevada [ Reid] are necessarily absent.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  I announce that the Senator from Mississippi [ Cochran], the Senator from Kansas [Kassebaum], the Senator from Arizona [McCain], and the Senator from South Dakota [Pressler] are necessarily absent. I further announce that, if present and voting, the Senator from Arizona [McCain] would vote ``aye.''
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Kerrey). Are there any other Senators in the Chamber who desire to vote? The result was announced--yeas 93, nays 0, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 12 Leg.] YEAS--93 Akaka Baucus Bennett Biden Bingaman Bond Boren Boxer Bradley Breaux Brown Bryan Bumpers Burns Byrd Campbell Chafee Coats Cohen Conrad Coverdell Craig D'Amato Danforth Daschle DeConcini Dodd Dole Domenici Dorgan Durenberger Exon Faircloth Feingold Feinstein Ford Glenn Gorton Graham Gramm Grassley Gregg Harkin Hatch Hatfield Heflin Helms Hollings Hutchison Jeffords Johnston Kempthorne Kennedy Kerrey Kerry Kohl Lautenberg Leahy Levin Lieberman Lott Lugar Mack Mathews McConnell Metzenbaum Mikulski Mitchell Moseley-Braun Moynihan Murkowski Nickles Nunn Packwood Pell Pryor Riegle Robb Rockefeller Roth Sarbanes Sasser Shelby Simon Simpson Smith Specter Stevens Thurmond Wallop Warner Wellstone Wofford NAYS--0 NOT VOTING--7 Cochran Inouye Kassebaum McCain Murray Pressler Reid So the amendment (No. 1286) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts is recognized.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, let me say to colleagues that we are going to proceed. Now we are open for business on amendments, and we are here prepared to do amendments today for as long as there are Senators prepared to come forward. This is a good time to do it. The majority leader has announced that whatever votes are set aside will begin at 10 o'clock in the morning on Tuesday, and we are prepared to proceed forward between now and 10 o'clock in the morning on Tuesday to take amendments and stack those votes for Tuesday. We will be here available for amendments on Monday at 1 o'clock through the rest of the day as long as there are amendments to come forward. I remind colleagues that under the unanimous-consent agreement all amendments must be offered by 6 p.m. on Tuesday evening. So, we are anxious obviously to try to move through the number of amendments that we have between now and then and hope that by 6 p.m. on Tuesday we are in a position to actually vote final passage of the bill. I believe the distinguished Senator from Kansas has an amendment on behalf of herself, Senator Simpson and the distinguished President pro tempore, who is prepared to move forward.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Kansas is recognized. Amendment No. 1289 (Purpose: To encourage asylum reforms that would prevent current abuse of the law)
 
The speaker is KASSEBAUM and he says  President, I am pleased to join with Senator Simpson in offering this amendment to encourage asylum reforms that would prevent current abuse of the law. Senator Robert Byrd is an original cosponsor of this amendment. This amendment was adopted by the Senate on November 10, 1993, during consideration of the crime bill. The Department of State is generally supportive of the amendment. This amendment expresses concern about the backlog of asylum cases which has now reached 355,000. To put this in perspective, last March the total backlog of cases was less than 200,000. By this March, the case backlog could well be twice as much as it was 1 year ago. The current abuse of asylum causes this extraordinary backlog and distorts the original intent of the Refugee Act of 1980. As a result, the whole asylum process is in disarray. The logical solution to this problem is to return to the original intent of the Refugee Act of 1980. This is a sense of the Congress amendment that: First, declares our asylum policy today should be what the law originally intended. When the Refugee Act of 1980 was written, the intent was to protect aliens who, because of events occurring after their arrival here, could not safely return home. That is why we provided an annual allotment of only 5,000 asylum slots when we passed the Refugee Act of 1980. Second, declares further that persons outside their country of nationality who have a wellfounded fear of persecution if they return should apply for refugee status with the local U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, or other international organization, office or at one of our refugee processing, offices abroad, and Third, in conclusion, calls for reform of our immigration, refugee, and asylum laws to correct the current problems.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The distinguished President pro tempore is recognized.
 
The speaker is BYRD and he says  President, I shall shortly propose an amendment at the request of the distinguished junior Senator from Kansas [ Kassebaum], an amendment offered by her and cosponsored by the distinguished Republican whip, Simpson, and which I shall also join in as a cosponsor. President, I am pleased to cosponsor the amendment being offered by Senators Kassebaum and Simpson. Even though a similar amendment was adopted by the Senate in November, I think we should take every opportunity to reiterate the critical need for swift reform of U.S. immigration, refugee and asylum laws. I applaud Senators Kassebaum and Simpson for calling attention to the well-documented abuses that exist in the area of asylum claims. Senator Simpson has introduced legislation to try to correct some of the shortcomings in this area, including S. 667 which he introduced last March and which I cosponsored. But I particularly want to congratulate Senator Kassebaum for including a call for broad reform of all of areas--all areas--of immigration policy. Dramatic changes around the world have forced us to rethink many areas of public policy. The demise of the Soviet Union has led to a complete overhaul of the U.S. defense establishment and a retooling of our foreign policy. The ever increasing economic interdependence of nations has prompted major changes in trade policy, including passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the formation of a single market in Europe, and the completion of the latest round of talks on the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Advances in transportation and communications have made travel easier for people all over the world. These things, plus developments such as the rise of nationalism and interethnic violence and a deep worldwide recession, have prompted the movement of large numbers of people in many regions of the world. In the face of all this change, our immigration laws still reflect an earlier time. When the Congress first codified U.S. asylum laws in 1980, we did so because America has always had a tradition of compassion for oppressed and persecuted peoples. Unfortunately, in our desire to provide a safe haven for those who legitimately fear for their lives, we have made it too easy for unscrupulous individuals to take advantage of our good will by using asylum procedures to circumvent the regular immigration process. Asylum and refugee laws should apply to individuals who have a legitimate fear of personal persecution in their home country, and not those who are fleeing from areas of general unrest or poverty. The United States does not have the resources it once had to help all those around the world who live in substandard conditions, or to accept all those who wish to come here for a better life. We have many people in our own country who are living in substandard conditions; many people in our own country who dream of having a better life. We do not have the resources. We simply do not have the resources and we are going to find that out more and more as the days of this Congress come and go. We do not have the resources to eliminate poverty and unemployment for our own population, much less--much less--the population of the rest of the world. Yet the current lax U.S. asylum procedures allow anyone to gain entry to the United States and become immediately eligible to work here and eligible to benefits that costs the American taxpayers money. All one needs to do is to show up at a U.S. port-of-entry, request asylum, and relate some vague story of persecution to the Immigration and Naturalization Service agent. The individual then receives the much-coveted work authorization documents and is asked to show up later for a hearing on the asylum claim. Many do not show up later. The system has become so backlogged that the hearing will most likely be more than a year later. And, as I said, not surprisingly, fewer than half of the asylum seekers ever appear for their hearing. The current backlog stands at 355,000 cases with 15,000 of those claims coming since November 10, 1993, the last time this amendment was before the Senate. But as I have said, I am concerned with more than just the asylum procedures. All aspects of U.S. immigration law must be reviewed. The American people want them to be reviewed. For two centuries America has graciously accepted immigrants. Many immigrant groups have played important roles in the history of this great Nation. Nobody doubts that. We are all, most of us are, descendants of immigrants. I am. I am the ninth-generation descendant of an immigrant from England and immigrants from Scotland. We are all immigrants, except those American Indians, and some of us have a little bit of that in our blood. For two centuries, we have accepted immigrants. They have added to our way of life. Their talents, their strengths, their skills, have contributed to America. I grew up in the coal fields where we had Polish, Czechoslovakian, Hungarian, English, Scotsmen, Irishmen. They worked on the railroads. They worked in the coal mines. They worked in the factories. They have helped to build this great country. But we cannot continue to absorb the levels of immigrants that we have experienced over the past few years. In a time of global political uncertainty and economic turmoil, the stability and relative prosperity of the United States become an irresistible magnet for those less well- off then ourselves. At time in our history, America gladly welcomed all those who sought refuge here, but that time is in the past. We no longer have limitless resources or vast open areas ripe for settlement. We place ever-increasing demands on an already overburdened environment. The time has come to look inward and start to take care of our own problems. I hope that, in addition to the many other items on the Senate's agenda, it will be possible to enact comprehensive immigration reform. Again I thank Senators Kassebaum and Simpson for keeping attention focused on this issue. President, I send the amendment to the desk.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report the amendment The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from West Virginia [Byrd], for Kassebaum, for herself, Simpson and Byrd, proposes an amendment numbered 1289.
 
The speaker is BYRD and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) in the last decade applications for asylum have greatly exceeded the original 5,000 annual limit provided in the Refugee Act of 1980, with more than 150,000 asylum applications filed in FY 93, and the backlog of cases growing to the current level of 355,000; (2) this flood of asylum claims has swamped the system, creating delays in the processing of applications of up to several years; (3) the delay in processing asylum claims due to the overwhelming numbers has contributed to numerous problems, including: (A) an abuse of the asylum laws by fraudulent applicants whose primary interest is obtaining work authority in the United States while their claim languishes in the backlogged asylum processing system; (B) the growth of alien smuggling operations, often involving organized crime; (C) a drain on limited resources resulting from the high cost of processing frivolous asylum claims through our multi- layered system; and (D) an erosion of public support for asylum; (4) Asylum, a safe haven protection for aliens abroad who cannot return home, has been perverted by some aliens who use asylum claims to circumvent our immigration and refugee laws and procedures; (5) a comprehensive revision of our asylum law and procedures is required to address these problems. (b) Policy.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) asylum is a process intended to protect certain aliens in the United States who, because of events occurring after their arrival here, cannot safely return home; (2) persons outside their country of nationality who have a well-founded fear of persecution if they return should apply for refugee status with the local UNHCR, or other relevant international organization, office or at one of our refugee processing centers abroad, if possible; (3) the immigration, refugee and asylum laws of the United States should be reformed to provide: (A) a procedure for the expeditious exclusion of asylum applicants who arrive at a port-of-entry with fraudulent documents, or no documents, and make a non-credible claim of asylum; and (B) the immigration, refugee, and asylum laws of the United States should be reformed to provide for a streamlined affirmative asylum processing system for asylum applicants who make their application after they have entered the United States.
 
The speaker is BYRD and he says  President, it is my understanding that the distinguished managers of the bill are familiar with this amendment and that it is their intention, I am informed, to accept the amendment and recommend its adoption by the Senate.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, the President pro tempore is indeed correct. I know the distinguished assistant minority leader is waiting to speak. He is a cosponsor. I will just say very quickly, this is an excellent amendment. In a sense, I almost feel as if it is generous in the fact that it is only a sense-of-the-Senate. This is a review that is long overdue. Asylum is being grossly abused for any number of reasons, ranging from economic discontent, to simply seeking work in this country or finding some way around the rules. A lot of people come into this country under the guise of ``asylum'' and, while it is being processed, they go out, find work, and disappear in the system. We need to prevent that abuse and it is wholly appropriate that the exhortations that are set forth in this amendment be adopted. We are prepared to accept it after the distinguished assistant minority leader has had a chance to speak.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Wyoming.
 
The speaker is SIMPSON and he says  President, my remarks will be very brief. One could not have a more remarkable ally in immigration and refugee matters than the remarkable senior Senator from West Virginia. He took me under his wing. He was a member of the Judiciary Committee when I came to the Judiciary Committee. When he saw my interest in immigration reform, he came to me and said, ``How may I best help?'' And he did everything possible to help me. He cosponsored every measure, stuck with me through every type of situation, through Senate procedures, through conference committees, through final approvals, through veto threats. Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia was at my side as an absolutely unfailing compatriot. When I produce the immigration bill that I have been working on for many months, I proudly will have his name as a cosponsor. So let me just thank him once again for the consistency and the passion which he puts in this issue. I think it is most appropriate that he presents this on behalf of Senator Kassebaum, because certainly he has been a leader. Certainly our asylum system has been turned on its head in recent years by use and misuse--mostly misuse. Would-be immigrants have found it more attractive to come to the United States to claim asylum than to apply for either refugee status or to come through the regular immigration process. It is more attractive because once they get to the United States, they become entitled to all of the due process that our Constitution gives to American citizens. These people who are in this country illegally and misusing asylum get all of the due process that we have. If they apply for refugee status while they are overseas, and they are found not to have a well-founded fear of persecution, they are denied refugee status. And that is the end of it. There is no difference in the standard by which refugees and asylees are adjudicated, except that asylees are here in the United States and refugees are outside of the United States. Originally, you could not even be a refugee until you have left your own country. Now people wait in their own country and are designated as refugees to come here. Others come here and say: I am here seeking asylum. Once in the United States they are entitled to appeal after appeal, with the final decision made maybe months or years later. They have the right to work. They walk out of JFK Airport, or from whatever port they have come, and they simply disappear into society. And we wonder about that. We ought to wonder. The process can take years. In the meantime, as I say, the alien has the opportunity to live and work in the U.S., which was the original objective. Yet the original purpose of this marvelous grace of asylum was to provide a refuge for people who were in the United States when conditions changed in their home country. When the situation at home was once again safe, asylees would go home. They would no longer be fleeing persecution in their country. They were here as asylees only because it is unsafe for them to return. And that is the grace and nobility of the law, as it was originally intended. That is why we provided only 5,000 slots for that when we passed the Refugee Act of 1980. Now it is so abused. I will not even go into the anecdotal material. Senator Byrd has done so, as has Senator Kassebaum in her statement. We have a separate refugee policy to enable people who are outside of their countries of nationality, and who do honestly have a well-founded fear of persecution. Our refugee policy allows people to apply for refugee status at refugee processing centers, U.S. embassies and consulates abroad. We should not make it more attractive for aliens to enter the United States, legally or illegally, to apply for asylum than it is for them to apply for refugee status abroad. So I certainly support the findings of the Kassebaum amendment and the policy it proposes. I pay tribute to Senator Byrd, who deserves the total award and honor for consistency throughout. Whether it had to do with refugees or illegal immigration or legal immigration or parole, or all the various distinctions, he has followed that through his entire career. So, Senator Kennedy, Senator Simon, and I, working with the administration and the Attorney General, have reached a bipartisan agreement on expedited asylum procedures for those aliens attempting to enter with fraudulent documents, or with no documents. I am also drafting major legislation to provide a more streamlined asylum process for those people who are already in the United States, or who come to the United States to claim asylum. I know in the course of that, I will have Senator Robert Byrd--and Senator Nancy Kassebaum; I pay tribute to her, too--as consistent and loyal colleagues as we grapple with this issue--a dandy one to play with because it is filled with emotion, fear, guilt, and racism. I thank the Chair.
 
The speaker is BYRD and he says  I thank the distinguished Senator from Wyoming for his felicitous remarks in my regard. I also thank the distinguished manager of the bill, Kerry, for his support of the amendment. His support means a great deal. I am indebted to him, as several people are.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I thank my colleague.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  If there be no further debate, the question is on agreeing to the amendment. The amendment (No. 1289) was agreed to.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I move to reconsider the vote.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I move to lay that motion on the table. The motion to lay on the table was agreed to.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I would like to simply return the compliments and thank both the distinguished Senator from Wyoming, who has been one of our strongest and most articulate spokespersons on the subject of immigration, and of course the distinguished President pro tempore, without whose support an awful lot does not happen around here. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is CONRAD and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The Senator from North Dakota is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is CONRAD and he says  President, I awoke this morning and got my copy of the Washington Post and found, on page 1, a story that was very disturbing. Headline: ``Agency Fails To Collect Millions in Loans to Wealthy Farm Owners.'' The story talks about FmHA, Farmers Home Administration, and their failure to pursue people who have borrowed money from it, in some cases millions of dollars, and have failed to repay those loans. First, I want to commend the Washington Post for this article. They were able to get the specific names and some specific examples of people that, because of privacy provisions, we have not been able to get. I think it is very useful that they have focused a light on very wealthy farmers who have gotten loans under programs that used to exist--that no longer do, in most cases--but who have failed to pay those loans back and whom FmHA has failed to make pay back these delinquent loans. I have spoken this morning to the new administrator of FmHA, Mike Dunn. I have asked him if he would be prepared to come to the hill next week to have a hearing on this question so we can hear directly from the new administrator what he intends to do to go after these deadbeats. I have spoken to my counterpart on the Subcommittee on Farm Credit, Senator Grassley of Iowa, who has agreed to be ready for those hearings. I have also spoken to both the chairman of the Agriculture Committee, Senator Leahy, and to the ranking member, Senator Lugar, and all of them are supportive of our going forward next week with a series of hearings on the questions raised by this article. One thing I think my colleagues should know is most of these loans were done under programs that have been killed or sharply curtailed by Congress in years past. The economic emergency loans, the disaster emergency loans that are the focus of most of these examples were badly abused and Congress recognized that and took action years ago. Nonetheless, we are still left with the problem of collecting on these loans. In one case, a man owes $3.5 million in backpayments, has a $900,000 beach house, and has a $1.7 million office building. Clearly, he is not someone without assets, and he ought to be pursued. He ought to be made to pay what he owes. In my discussion with the FmHA Director this morning, I pointed out to him two provisions in law that allow that agency to take action. First, people are not supposed to receive any writedown or change in their loan status if the delinquency was not beyond the power of the borrower. In other words, if the delinquent had an ability to pay that loan or reduce the loan amount or to pay the interest on that loan, they should be compelled to do it. That is in the law. Second, we have provided in the law that if somebody operated in bad faith, they would not be eligible for any of the loan servicing provisions of the law. They would not be eligible for writedown, they would not be eligible for restructuring, they would not be eligible for any favorable treatment from the agency. President, I wanted to alert my colleagues that action is going to be taken with respect to these wealthy farmers who are not paying what they owe. It is intolerable, it is unacceptable and action is going to be taken and it is going to start immediately. (The remarks of Conrad pertaining to the introduction of S. 1808 are located in today's Record under ``Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.'')
 
The speaker is CONRAD and he says  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I have an amendment at the desk and I ask that it be stated.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report. The legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from North Carolina [Helms], for himself, DeConcini, Coats, and Brown, proposes an amendment numbered 1290.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: On page 179, after line 6, insert the following: SEC. . CHINESE FLEEING COERCIVE POPULATION CONTROL POLICIES. (1) Pursuant to paragraph (42)(A) of section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(42)(A)), all adjudicators of asylum or refugee status shall give fullest possible consideration to applications from nationals of the People's Republic of China who express a fear of persecution upon return to that country because they refuse to abort a pregnancy or resist surgical sterilization in violation of Chinese Communist Party directives on population, or who demonstrate that they have experienced persecution on account of such refusal, if such refusal is or was undertaken with full awareness of the urgent priority assigned to such directives by all levels of the Chinese government, and full awareness of the severe consequences which may be imposed for violation of such directives. (2) In view of the urgent priority assigned to the ``one couple, one child'' policy by high level Chinese Communist Party officials and local party cadres at all levels, as well as the severe consequences commonly imposed for violations of that policy, which are regarded as ``political dissent,'' refusal to abort or to be sterilized, as described in subsection (a) of this section, shall be viewed as an act of political defiance justifying a ``well-founded fear of persecution'' sufficient to establish refugee status under paragraph (42)(A) of section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(42)(A)). (3) All other factors which may contribute to a determination of asylum or refugee status in such cases are to be given additional weight by asylum and refugee adjudicators, such factors including, but not limited to, overt political activities while in the United States or third countries, membership in an ethnic or religious minority, family background and history, or suspicion of ``counterrevolutionary'' activities by Chinese Communist Party officials. (4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to necessitate a grant of asylum or refugee status to any individual who is ineligible for admission to the United States under section 212(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)). The Secretary of State and the Attorney General shall, within 30 days of enactment of this section, promulgate regulations and guidelines to carry out the provisions of this section. (6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as-- (A) Shifting the burden of providing, in each individual case, facts sufficient to establish a claim of asylum or refugee status as described in subsection (a) of this section, from any person making such claim of asylum or refugee status to the Attorney General; or (B) Requiring the Attorney General to disprove such claim in the absence of proof of facts sufficient to establish a claim of refugee or asylum status as described in subsection (a) of this section by any person making such claim. (7) The number of persons receiving political status solely because of the provisions of this section shall not exceed 1,000 in any fiscal year. (8) The Attorney General shall not be obligated to grant political asylum to any person claiming to qualify under subsection (a) if the Attorney General proves by clear and convincing evidence that such person has claimed such status solely for the purposes of evading the immigration laws of the United States. (9) The provisions of this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section or any other provision of law, all adjudicators of asylum or refugee status shall apply the provisions of this section to every case, administrative or judicial proceeding, or appeal that is pending on the date of enactment of this Act, and to any claim that arises on or after such date of enactment.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, in 1989--I believe in July--both Houses of Congress overwhelmingly agreed to an amendment to the Emergency Chinese Refugee Relief Act sponsored by Senator Armstrong and Senator DeConcini. Senators will probably remember that this legislation was in response to the Tiananmen Square crackdown. The amendment required asylum adjudicators to give fullest possible consideration to asylum applications from Chinese nationals fleeing coercive population control policies, specifically the program of forced abortion and coerced sterilization. The Senate vote was 95 to 0 on that amendment which is virtually identical to the one I have just offered. The House vote was 300 in favor, 115 opposed. Unfortunately, the amendment never became law because the underlying bill was vetoed, and that is why I have offered virtually the same amendment that was offered in 1989 by Senators Armstrong and DeConcini. I am offering the amendment again because--I find this difficult to believe--the administration's policy today is to deport individuals fleeing the brutal population control program of Communist China. As I understand it, this administration does not believe that these people are being persecuted. President Bush issued an Executive order and interim regulations which should have resolved this problem. The Clinton administration never rescinded the Bush Executive order, but they have nonetheless changed the policy. The pending amendment would not be necessary if the Clinton administration had not blocked Attorney General Barr's final regulations to implement the Executive order from being printed in the Federal Register. Some Senators believe that these refugees are already being given what they call enhanced consideration, but these refugees are not being given any such consideration. This is a little confusing since it was candidate Clinton who was so critical of President Bush in 1992 for not being tougher on Communist China. I remember the campaign rhetoric of the then candidate Clinton, and because I did not agree with Bush I applauded candidate Clinton for his position on this issue. He spoke over and over again about the human rights abuses by and in Communist China. I thought he was right then, and I still think that is the right position, but he has totally reversed it, totally reversed it. Senators should understand that since the then Attorney General Barr's regulations were never published in the Federal Register, the bureaucracy continues to operate under rules and regulations which do not grant asylum to Chinese nationals fleeing coercive population control policies. I go back, and I point out that both Houses of Congress passed this amendment, virtually this same amendment. The vote in this Senate was 95 to zero. The vote in the House was 300 to 115. That is why I feel obliged to offer today what I am calling the Armstrong-DeConcini amendment of 1989. President, I will not talk about the brutal nature of the Chinese population control program unless it becomes necessary. I think every Senator agrees that there is ample documentation proving beyond a doubt that the persecution is real, that the persecution is brutal, and that the persecution is tantamount to political persecution. The past two administrations held this view. President Clinton, when he was a candidate for the Presidency in 1992, not only embraced the view, he said it was not enough; we ought to do more. And he chided a fellow named George Bush for not being stronger. So what is going on? President, there is no reason to believe that the Chinese policy has changed. There is no evidence whatsoever to support any contention that there has been a change. To the contrary, on December 22 of last year, 1993, it was reported that China intends to require--require--abortions, sterilizations, and marriage bans--you cannot even get married--in order to avoid new births of inferior quality--get that--and heighten the standards of the whole population. What was that fellow's name in Germany back in the thirties? Was it Hitler, or somebody like that, who said precisely the same thing? And everybody in America and around the world was aghast. Now the administration says boys will be boys, nothing going on over there, forget it. I cannot forget it. President, this amendment should receive broad bipartisan, and I would hope, unanimous support. Again, that is what it had in 1989. I think the record will show, and show clearly, that the Senator from North Carolina is not a Senator who favors opening the borders of our Nation, I do not favor allowing anyone to come to the United States for any contrived reason, but I hope Senators will agree that this type of case I am describing is not acceptable and we ought to let these people in. We ought to give them asylum. We ought to help them avoid the brutal persecution in their homeland which is Communist China. This amendment will not result in a significant increase of illegal Chinese immigrants. During fiscal year 1992, when the more generous policy was in place, just about 200 of those given asylum based their claims on fear of persecution under Communist China's coercive population control policy which I have just described. President, there are just some things that the U.S. Government should not do. Surely, we can agree that the administration should not send back to Communist China people who will, if returned, have to suffer unspeakable torture at the hands of the Chinese population control police. I am prepared to talk about this for a long time, but I do not think it is necessary. I am going to yield the floor in the hopes that my colleague from Massachusetts [Kerry] will be willing to accept this amendment.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, it may well be that we will. I am just trying to run it through the appropriate channels to make sure that all parties who have a concern with respect to this issue are in agreement. There is absolutely no question whatsoever on the part of any Senator, and I absolutely know on the part of this administration, that we are opposed to the Chinese incentive structure with respect to one child, one family and the policy of coercion that has forced people either to leave the country or to seek extraordinary solutions to the coercion that they live under. The question, obviously, here is a very difficult one of how you measure what we just voted on a few moments ago in the amendment of Senator Byrd and Senator Simpson where we talked about how we have to get stricter on this issue of asylum and whether or not the language that is proposed--I do not know that it does or not; I just want to make sure that it does not--but that the language proposed by the Senator does not now open up an ability of almost anybody who wants to to come in and claim that this is the rationale for their asylum. How you balance that is difficult. I was just in China. I spent a week there. This is one of the issues that I raised with Chinese officials. They have enormous concerns themselves not only about the world's view on the policy--I think we are having an impact. I think it is important to say that the world's opprobrium that has been cast on their policy has been felt and heard. So it is appropriate, indeed, for us to take the position. At the same time, China is struggling with the reality that they already have about 11 people per half an acre or something. They are the fastest growing population on the face of this planet. They are one-quarter of the world's population, 1.2 billion people. In fact, if you want to talk about problems, China, just to keep up with the current rate of population, has to create something like 2 million jobs a year. So this is an enormous problem which they are aware of. Also, I think they are beginning to understand that it cannot be dealt with in the way that they have in the past. We need, obviously, to be much more engaged with China, and in fact with the rest of the world, on this question of population growth. It is not insignificant. You look at a country like Haiti where already it has enormous turmoil. Haiti is a country of 7 million people. In the next 18 years it is going to become a country of 14 million people, and it already cannot sustain the 7 million that it has. You can go from country to country around the world and find this replicated. How we are going to deal with this problem in the context of our immigration policy that tries to respect the rights of people not to be coerced but at the same time balance our own ability to take them in is going to be a very, very difficult issue indeed. And that is the issue that the Senator is confronting us with in this resolution. So I simply want to make certain that a couple of things are understood. President Clinton is not only 100 percent opposed, as he said he was in his campaign, to any kind of family coercion with respect to planning, but our Government is working on a number of different fronts right now to promote safe and voluntary--I underscore voluntary--access to family planning around the world. Voluntarism and informed choice and protection of individual reproductive rights are the guiding principle of this administration's population policy and this country's population policy. I might add, as the world's leader in international population efforts, we are going to promote vigorously these views at the upcoming International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo. I have personally written to the majority leader already and asked that we put together a Senate delegation and a House delegation to formally attend this conference because of its importance and because of the very kind of issue that the Senator from North Carolina has raised. So if the Senator from North Carolina will simply let me make certain that those who are most concerned with this area of jurisdiction are comfortable with the language he has proposed--I am personally comfortable, I do not foresee a problem, and I want to make sure there is not one. If there is not, we should be able to accept this amendment. If he would forbear until we have done that, we can proceed.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Very well. Will the Senator yield?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  The Senator could not offer a more fair proposition, President. Senator Kerry has already voted for this amendment once at the time it was passed, and there have been only two minor changes for clarification. The television camera may not be able to focus on this amendment because we took out of the Congressional Record the exact text that was enacted. All that we have done is to add the words ``sterilization in violation of Chinese Communist Party directives on population, or who demonstrate that they have experienced persecution on account of such refusal.'' I had that put in, President, to keep out any interlopers or anybody who has contrived a reason to come into this country. So the Senator's proposition is entirely fair. I might note that I have advised that Senator Simpson wants a second degree to this amendment which is fair enough because he, too, is a fair man and a good friend. So what shall we do?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, if I could just ask my colleague if he is prepared to proceed forward, I think we are working to close off some en bloc, and hopefully we will be able to proceed to an en bloc amendment shortly. If the Senator has any other amendment or any other colleagues have an amendment, we could temporarily set this aside until Senator Simpson arrives and then proceed.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Very well. President, I ask unanimous consent that this amendment be set aside so that I may prepare to call up another one.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  While I am doing that, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. Order of Procedure
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the two amendments listed for Senator Boren on the consented amendment list be deleted, and I ask that the amendments of Senator Feingold, also listed on the prior-approved list, be deleted.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Conrad). Without objection, it is so ordered. Amendment No. 1291 (Purpose: To express the sense of the Senate that certain conditions should be met before the People's Republic of China is accorded nondiscriminatory most-favored-nation treatment)
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I send an amendment to the desk and ask for its immediate consideration.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will report. The assistant legislative clerk read as follows: The Senator from North Carolina [Helms] proposes an amendment numbered 1291.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that reading of the amendment be dispensed with.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. The amendment is as follows: SECTION 1. POLICY REGARDING THE CONDITIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA SHOULD MEET TO CONTINUE TO RECEIVE NONDISCRIMINATORY MOST-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT. It is the sense of the Senate that the People's Republic of China should not continue to be accorded nondiscriminatory most-favored-nation treatment by the United States, unless the President reports to the Congress that the government of that country-- (1) has taken appropriate actions to begin adhering to the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in China and Tibet; (2) is allowing unrestricted emigration of the citizens who desire to leave China for reasons of political or religious persecution to join family members abroad, or for other valid reasons; (3) has provided an acceptable accounting and release of-- (A) Chinese citizens detained, accused, or sentenced as a result of the nonviolent expression of their political beliefs in relation to events which occurred during and after the violent repression of demonstrations in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989; and (B) other citizens detained, accused, or sentenced for the nonviolent expression of their political beliefs or for peacefully exercising their internationally guaranteed rights of freedom of speech, association, and assembly; (4) has taken effective, verifiable action to prevent export of products to the United States manufactured wholly or in part by convict, forced, or indentured labor and has complied with the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding signed on August 7, 1992, by allowing, without limitation or restriction, United States Customs officials to visit places suspected of producing such goods for export; and (5) has made overall significant progress in-- (A) ceasing religious persecution and lifting restrictions on freedom of religious belief in the People's Republic of China and Tibet; (B) releasing leaders and members of religious groups detained, imprisoned, or under house arrest for expression of their religious beliefs; (C) ceasing financial and other incentives to encourage non-Tibetans to relocate in Tibet, including development and other projects which bring in substantial numbers of non- Tibetan workers; (D) ceasing unfair and discriminatory trade practices which restrict and unreasonably burden American business; (E) providing United States exporters fair access to Chinese markets, including lowering tariffs, removing nontariff barriers, and increasing the purchase of United States goods and services; (F) adhering to the guidelines and parameters of the Missile Technology Control Regime and the controls adopted by the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Australian Group on Chemical and Biological Arms; (G) adhering to the Joint Declaration on Hong Kong that was entered into between the United Kingdom and the People's Republic of China; (H) cooperating with United States efforts to obtain an acceptable accounting of United States military personnel who are listed as prisoners of war or missing in action as a result of their service in-- (i) the Korean conflict; or (ii) the Vietnam conflict; (I) ceasing the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts; and (J) providing international human rights and humanitarian groups access to prisoners, trials, and places of detention.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, this subject has been, on many occasions, on the floor of the Senate. It is the issue of most-favored-nation trading status for Communist China. If there ever was a modest amendment, this one is. It clearly restates the priorities specified in S. 806, which was Senator Mitchell's China MFN legislation, on which I am an original cosponsor with Senators Moynihan, Sarbanes, Dodd, Leahy, and others. The point I am making is that this amendment is by no means a new proposal, because the Senate has passed precisely this proposal in the past. It does not impose any new statutory conditions. Rather, it is intended to send a direct message, and does send a direct message to both the Chinese and the administration, that as part of the MFN renewal process later this year, the Senate will measure Chinese progress on the following concerns: Human rights, including adherence to the universal declaration of human rights. The release of political and religious detainees. That is a fancy word for prisoners. Freedom of emigration. And, most important to me, respect for Tibet. Yes; I confess right this minute that I am a great admirer and a friend of the Dalai Lama. I meet with him every time he comes to Washington. The second measurement is trade, including whether China has genuinely stopped the practice of illegal prison labor exports and unfair anti-American trade practices in general. Nonproliferation, including full adherence to ballistic missile, nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons control, and other items; for example, whether China has stopped jamming the Voice of America, and whether China is upholding agreements on the future of Hong Kong. If I ever agreed with the distinguished majority leader on anything, I agreed with him when he took a respectful stand on this floor on this matter. He was eloquent and he was right. I was proud to stand with him. Let me share a few of the comments of George Mitchell, the distinguished majority leader. I remind my colleagues that this amendment is by no means binding, and I do not propose that it be, which I think makes it all the more appropriate at the present time. In any case, Senator Mitchell had this to say--and listen to the clarity of this former Federal judge's assessment of the situation. He said: This is a reasonable bill. It does not impose arbitrary or unattainable conditions on extending MFN trade status to China. It merely requires that the Communist Chinese leaders live up to the commitments they have made to respect international standards of human rights and fair trade practices and missile, nuclear and chemical weapons agreements. It supports fundamental American principles and values. Obviously, no two Senators always agree on everything. And there have been times when he and I have strongly disagreed with each other. I hope, as it has always been as far as I am concerned, that we agree to disagree agreeably. But I completely concur with him on this subject. We all know of Communist China's sorry record of continued human rights abuses, unfair trade practices and failure to comply with arms proliferation agreements. That record has not improved, and I hope no Senator with a straight face will get up in this Chamber and say that situation has indeed improved. Why, you may ask yourself. In large part because China apparently believes that when push comes to shove, the United States is all talk and no action. We sent some people over there during the Bush administration, and I protested, and they clinked the champagne glasses with a bunch of folks who used tanks to run over students and pulverize those young Chinese students. The Clinton administration is helping foster this perception that China has regarding the United States, that we are a paper tiger, et cetera. Actions speak louder than words. And despite the administration's tough words in the campaign of 1992 and since, the appeasing actions sent absolutely the wrong signal, and that is the reason I am offering this amendment and asking for it to be considered. For example, despite the importance we have rightly attached to China's strict adherence to nuclear and ballistic missile technology and nonproliferation agreements, the administration has failed to back up its impressive rhetoric with effective action. Specifically, when China knowingly violated the Missile Technology Control Regime yet again by transferring missile technology to Pakistan, the administration reluctantly imposed only the minimum--the minimum--sanctions required by law. Without the law, I doubt that anything at all would have been done. Incredibly, the administration is now in the process of waiving the sanctions statute by legal reinterpretation and thereby accepting as progress--as progress--China's offer merely to talk about nonproliferation. What is going on? This administration--and I found the same fault and I was just as candid when George Bush was sitting in the Oval Office--this administration is helping China make a mockery of nonproliferation compliance. There are no two ways about it. When will it take Chinese violations seriously? When terrorist Iran fires a Chinese-designed nuclear missile, will that do it? I say, President, that if the administration will not send a firm signal, then the Senate must do so. Again, I emphasize that I said the same thing when George Bush was sitting in the Oval Office. There are numerous other examples of appeasement in the areas of human rights and trade. I think it is truly ironic. When Clinton, the candidate, called George Bush's policy of engagement with China ``coddling the dictators in Beijing,'' I said, ``Right on, Clinton.'' George Bush was my friend, and I supported him, but I disagreed with him on his administration's handling of Communist China. Clinton disagreed with him during the campaign. But the same Clinton today is engaging in a love-fest with China even more amorous through his own self-described policy of deeper engagement. I do not know what he means by that. He has never defined it. Meanwhile, all of this has not been lost on those guys sitting over there in Beijing. If you think it has, think again. I do not want to say that this administration practices the opposite of what it preaches, but I need to be shown with clarity what is going to be done. At least we should ask ourselves why should the Chinese take the MFN threat seriously? They are not. The rubberstamp Chinese Congress recently enacted another forced abortion and infanticide law. The inhumanity is incredible. I guess the Communist dictators just cannot kill innocent babies fast enough over there, President. With much media hype, China released a couple of dissidents, just a token gesture to impress some high-level American businessmen. Maybe some Senators were over there bowing and scraping. I do not know. Now, I thank the dictators of Red China for small blessings, I suppose, but these detainees, as they call them--they were political prisoners; that is the word to call them--these political prisoners were simply replaced by other people whom the government in Beijing arrested and imprisoned to keep its political gulags full and operating, many of them manufacturing goods to be exported into the United States. One small step forward for three big giant steps backwards is no way to have a relationship, and we should not put up with it. I am encouraged that some in the administration appear to be waking up to this problem and warning the Chinese about MFN renewal conditions. It is about time. This amendment will help. It will help reinforce and provide credibility to these few and late warnings because it will remind the Chinese that regardless of what mixed signals they may receive from the executive branch, the legislative branch, the Congress of the United States, does have the final say, after all, in the matter of MFN renewal. I want our message to be crystal clear. I do not want it to be watered down, and I do not want it to be haggled over. We have taken this stand before, and let us have the courage to take it again. Let us say and mean that Congress expects genuine progress, demonstrable progress, and that is a heck of a lot more than a couple steps forward and steps backwards, and all that sort of thing. I am well aware that the Chinese are sensitive to the perception that they are being pressured to change. That does not bother me at all. It should not bother anybody in this Congress. Oh, yes; they pretend to get all excited and huffy about proving no American can tell them what to do. And China apologists erroneously claim that amendments like this one at the desk right now harden Chinese resistance to change. Baloney. What are we--a bunch of squirming earthworms? China always looks after China's best interests. Go back and look in history. And China knows that MFN renewal is very much in its best self-interest. They want it. They need it. If the threat of MFN denial is credible, they will react. I repeat, they will react. So this amendment at the desk, which restates our concerns 5 months before the final decision on MFN, gives the Chinese the time to make measurable progress, not imaginary progress, not contrived progress; it gives the Chinese time to gain the flexibility to justify positive changes any way they like. For example, if they want to euphemistically call real compliance with the nonproliferation agreements Deng Xiaoping's new national security initiative, that suits me fine. They can call it anything they want to. But let us make them put up or shut up. Similarly, it gives business interests time to both increase their own lobbying with the Chinese Government for change and make contingency plans should MFN not be renewed by this Congress. Everyone is forearmed and forewarned about what to expect and what might happen. But let us stand up and have character about this Government's position because, President, there is no right way to do a wrong thing. I am delighted with the stand that the distinguished majority leader has taken in the past and I assume in the present. This makes it a fully bipartisan approach which has been strongly supported by leaders of the majority and Cabinet officers alike. Senator Mitchell said it well. He said, ``This is a modest, limited and carefully crafted bill.'' This amendment is a nonbinding version of his bill. The Senator from Maine has been quite emphatic about this point, stating: I repeat: The conditions in the bill are conditions which the Chinese Government itself has said that it can meet. Why should we object to asking the Chinese to do what they have said they are prepared to do? Why? Are we a bunch of namby-pamby earthworms trying to find an easy way out of every problem that comes up? Listen to what Senator Mitchell had to say about President Bush's policy of ``engagement.'' And I, at the time said, ``Hooray. You are exactly right.'' And George Bush, I reiterate, was my friend and I supported him both times he ran for the Presidency. Senator Mitchell said, ``The administration's policy,'' meaning the Bush administration policy, ``has rested on a hope, a hope that the Chinese regime would improve its behavior. That hope has not been realized. It is time to replace personal hope with national incentives for change.'' And to George Mitchell, I say, ``Amen, brother. You were right then, and what you said then is right now.'' Our distinguished former colleague from Texas, Bentsen, now a member of the President's Cabinet, as a Senator said the following about the language of this amendment now pending in the U.S. Senate: The conditions set forth in this legislation are reasonable. They are not extreme, as some would claim. They are the minimum that we ought to ask a country which is enjoying a highly profitable trade relationship with this country,'' meaning the United States. And Secretary Bentsen is not the only current high administration official who supported this approach. As Senator Bentsen told this Chamber in 1992, ``In August, we heard testimony in the Finance Committee from President Reagan's last Ambassador to China, Winston Lord.'' President, this is the same Winston Lord who is now in charge of policy for China as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia. Senator Bentsen continued describing Winston Lord's position saying: He counseled us to forge a China policy that both conducts requisite business and honors our ideals. That is a seesaw. We have to keep it level. ``He counseled us to pass the bill before the Senate today.'' The chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Pell, stated in 1992, ``These are not onerous commitments. We are not asking China to do what others are not asked. These are international commitments to which most states have acceded. They are the brick and mortar of the world order.'' And I remind my friend, Senator Kerry, that he, too, provided his endorsement, stating, ``American interests and ideals are clearly served by this legislation.'' And, again, I agree with my friend John Kerry, of Massachusetts. I hope he has not changed his mind. The other Senator from Massachusetts, Kennedy, got in his opinion. He said, ``As long as the Chinese Government pursues its repressive and irresponsible policies, China should be a least-favored nation, not a most-favored nation. Enacting this legislation will place America on the side of human rights, economic reform, and ending the arms race.'' And then my friend from Connecticut, Senator Dodd, with his usual eloquence, said, ``In the case of China, we have simply run out of options. We have held out the carrot; now is the time for the stick.'' A pretty good statement Chris Dodd made. But he said more. He said, ``The alternative is a policy that coddles a repressive and inhumane leadership in Beijing.'' Amen, Chris Dodd. You are exactly right. And then he said about the language which is now before the Senate in the pending amendment, ``The legislation before us represents an effort by Congress to set United States-China relations on a wiser course.'' Now those are just a few statements by a few people, all of whom I respect. I do not agree with them all of the time, just as I did not agree with President Bush on everything. I agreed with the distinguished majority leader of the U.S. Senate, Mitchell, and disagreed with my President. I still agree with the majority leader. In any case, President, it is clear that China needs a strong bipartisan signal from Congress and the pending amendment does just that in a most measured and reasonable way. I urge its approval. I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  President, I hope my friend from North Carolina is not going to totally take off from this debate. He has asked some interesting questions and he certainly deserves answers to them. I trust he wants the answers and not just to ask the questions for the sake of the politics of the situation. But that is really what you are looking at here. I think we ought to just stop and pay tribute to a significant figure in the Senate who knows how to sort of raise the political rubes, if you will. But when you really look at the policy and when you really examine what President Clinton is doing, there is no relationship between that and what the Senator from North Carolina was just talking about. What the Senator from North Carolina is doing is pretty transparent-- quoting a lot of Democrats, turning to now Secretary Bentsen, turning to the majority leader, Senator Mitchell, pulling their words out from the debate several years ago; and even turning, in his good wisdom, to the comments from the two Senators from Massachusetts in an effort somehow, I suppose, to put us on the spot and to suggest that perhaps there is something we ought to be embarrassed about. Let me say, point blank to the Senator from North Carolina, not only is there nothing to be embarrassed about, but the policy that is in place today is tougher than the policy that was in place with President Bush and it is precisely the same policy that is reflected in the very document that he reads from, from 1992, that was offered by Senator Mitchell. Except that rather than be a policy that is pushed exclusively under the banner of MFN, this administration has wisely chosen to highlight human rights under the banner of MFN, and work on the issues of proliferation and trade on separate tracks. I ask my colleague from North Carolina to measure what this administration has done in 1 year, on those separate tracks, versus what President Bush or President Reagan did in 12 years, on MFN. Year after year after year, President Bush was vetoing, President Reagan was vetoing. This administration has taken sanctions which the Bush administration never was willing to take, on trade and on missiles. On the missile transfer it was President Clinton who put in the sanctions on the sale of satellites. And on trade most recently, we went to the brink of a trade war because we were willing to be tough on unfair trade practices of the Chinese in the transshipment of textiles through Hong Kong and other countries to the United States. And we got something out of the Chinese through that separate track. We did not have to wait for a June annual process of MFN. We did it now. We did it in the last month. So, in point of fact, President Clinton has a tougher policy, a working policy, a successful policy and a policy that, just because it does not fit under this one banner of what Senator Mitchell and many of us supported 2 years ago, does not mean you are not pushing those same issues in 1994. Let me be very, very precise about this so we understand the game that is being offered here by the Senator from North Carolina. The Senator comes to the floor and he quotes Senator Mitchell and says, ``Gee, whiz, if it was good enough for George Bush it ought to be good enough for President Clinton.'' The fact is, what President Clinton has is better than what was offered to George Bush. And the Senator from North Carolina ought to understand the distinction of what has happened now versus what happened then. Let me not rely on my statements and my rhetoric. Let me read directly from the President's Executive order which is the judgment of today. And let us compare it to the language that the Senator from North Carolina relies on. In the language that the Senator from North Carolina has now offered the Senate, saying why are we not doing this tough stuff now, in that language we were required to take appropriate actions to deal with universal declaration of human rights in China and Tibet. I read from the President's Executive order saying that Secretary of State cannot--cannot--recommend that China has sufficiently adhered--again, MFN--unless it takes steps to adhere to the universal declaration of human rights. And that it protects Tibet's distinctive religious and cultural heritage. So we have the very thing in the Executive order today on human rights singled out at a higher order of priority than you had in the bill that the Senator from North Carolina is pointing to. Then the bill says, ``is allowing unrestricted immigration of citizens who desire to leave China for reasons of religious or political persecution.'' You look to the Executive order and it says, ``Extension will substantially promote the freedom of emigration objectives of section 402 of the act.'' So you have the precise requirements of emigration. Then you look further and it has requirements regarding an accounting and release of people who were in Tiananmen. We have been getting that accounting. It is almost irrelevant now because we know. We have gotten the accounting. The accounting is ongoing and we forced that process. In fact most of them are now out of jail. Not all of them. There are some serving sentences, and we are still struggling on these who are serving sentences. But their release and visitation is one of the conditions of the Executive order. If you look at the Executive order it says, ``The Secretary shall also determine whether China has made progress with respect to releasing and providing an acceptable accounting for Chinese citizens imprisoned or detained for the nonviolent expression of their political and religious beliefs, including such expression of beliefs in connection with the democracy wall in Tiananmen Square.'' So not only is Tiananmen Square but all freedom of expression and democracy efforts and rights to assemble, et cetera, taken account in the Executive order just as they were in the language that is held up by Senator Helms. Next, adhering to the guidelines and parameters of missile technology. OK, that is one of the items that is taken out and treated separately; but which our administration, the Clinton administration, has taken sanctions on. Contrary to anything that the Bush administration did. Then you point to the joint declaration on Hong Kong. That is also something that we have asserted in the U.S. Senate by now making part of our law. It is already part of our law. We have asserted it in all of our discussions with the Chinese. In fact in Secretary Bentsen's recent visit to China it was front and center as one of the points of discussion. Then you have cooperating with the United States to obtain an accounting of U.S. military personnel in Korea and Vietnam. I might point out that China has just permitted a dig to take place, an excavation and exploration on the Chinese border near Vietnam. And they have further permitted us to have cooperation with respect to the issue of Americans missing from that war. The next item is ceasing the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts. That is the item in the Helms bill. If you turn to the Executive order it says ``Permitting international radio and television broadcasts into China.'' So that item is contained in the bill. That is it. That is the Helms bill, entirely accounted for within the Executive order and within the two tracks which we are operating on, on trade and on the issue of missile technology transfer. As I mentioned earlier, President, I just came back from a week in China--a couple of days in Hong Kong, in Kwangtung Province, the south provinces, and several days in Beijing. I met with dissidents, I met with business people, I met with Hong Kong officials, I met with Chris Patten, the Governor of Hong Kong for Great Britain, I met with ministers of defense and foreign ministry personnel and others in China, I met with officials in Kwangtung and so forth. I will say to my friend from North Carolina, I and others--Secretary Bentsen was there, Congressman Gephardt was there, Senator Johnston and the delegation were there--they have had an enormous transmission of message in the last month of the seriousness of the United States present administration's position on human rights, which is fully embracing all of the components of what he is complaining Senator Mitchell put on the floor 2 years ago but which somehow is in a different standard today. We are making enormous progress on that. In certain portions. Not enough progress in other portions. Emigration is not fundamentally a problem today. They are allowing people to leave China and to come to the United States. That is being served. On the issue of prison labor we believe we have made enormous progress, and that is now part of a memorandum of understanding and of a joint process. On intellectual property rights we are making enormous progress, and there is now a memorandum of understanding and they are promulgating new laws and rules in China with transparency within the process, so we will have an ability to enforce the law and protect our rights. We are now with respect to the visits to the prisons still discussing that issue and pushing it. But I believe we are going to make progress on that within the next few months. While I was there they told me that they are planning to release certain political prisoners. Indeed, the very next day after the meetings I had, they released people in Tibet. It is not enough yet, but it is a process that is working. So to suggest that somehow President Clinton and this administration, which I think have put human rights into a far more significant bubble, if you will, as a consequence of putting it into a single Executive order package, while not only promising to follow through on the missile track and the trade track but, in fact, demonstratedly having followed through on that track far more than President Bush and President Reagan did--it is really hard to understand where the Senator from North Carolina is coming from except to try to create some kind of moment of embarrassment. It does not work. It is not there. There is nothing to be embarrassed about. This administration is proceeding forward with far greater vigor, with far more focus, and with far more follow through than either administration of the last 12 years. I think the Senator from North Carolina ought to be here congratulating him. He may come back and suggest, ``Well, if they are doing so well, why don't they put it all into this one message?'' That is not the way diplomacy ought to be carried out, and the United States Senate should not sit here and undo the new initiative of the President and his Secretary of State which they engaged in last fall with the Chinese. We should not just stand here and suddenly undo something that is working. Last fall, they initiated, at some risk, a new dialog with the Chinese in an effort to try to recognize the fact that you cannot just always be in confrontation status with large nations in the world. That is one of the most important impressions that I think I came back with from that part of the world, President. The Senator from North Carolina said something very important. He said China looks after China's interests, just as we look after our interests in the United States. Those words are true. China will look after China's interest. The question is how far you can push one interest of the United States, or the rest of the world, up against China's real bottom-line interests, and how much leverage do we in truth have or believe we have to be able to do that. One of the things that I have learned in 20 years now of dealing with different countries in Asia--and I was deeply involved in the efforts in the Philippines; I have been deeply involved in Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam and now more recently have begun to focus more attention on the issue of China and Indonesia--we should recognize that we are all in a different position today than we were yesterday and in a different position yesterday than we were a month ago and a year ago and 2 years ago. A remarkable process of change is going on in China. There is no turning back for China. This huge country with a population one-quarter of the globe, 1.2 billion people and growing at a rate that exceeds the imagination, has the fastest economic growth of any nation on the face of this planet, growing at 20 percent in some provinces, growing at 11 or 12 percent as a nation. In those provinces where they are growing and where there are now businesses from all over the world, their people are beginning to think differently, behave differently, and enjoy a different set of rights. I met with American businesses and foreign businesses there. I asked them what happens to the Chinese person who comes into the company. Do they get paid differently? Do they work under different rules? Do they have different opportunities? And the answers to those questions in every case is, yes, not only that but because of this transition, people who used to have to get the permission of their so-called work unit to be able to leave one place of business and go work somewhere else are today able just to quit a job and go out and find a job somewhere else and work somewhere else. A lot of fancy cars are turning up in Kwangtung Province and in other provinces on the coast. A lot of people are making money. In fact, the Peoples Liberation Army, the PLA, is busily involved today in making a lot of money. They are investing. In point of fact, the Army has been told by the central government they do not have enough money to fundamentally pay for a lot of stuff; they have to go out and earn money to support themselves. Only 7 percent of their budget goes into the military. They are trying to modernize in some regards. But much is changing in China. Every person I talked to in every part of Asia indicated to me that they cannot turn back without some wrenching, extraordinary, convoluted confrontation that would rip the country apart and have enormous implications for the rest of the world. I have personally come to question--while I voted for MFN many, many, many times and it was the right policy all the way along and it is the right policy this year, now, it is still correct--I can see a point soon where we should recognize that China is in a post-Tiananmen period. The transition has already begun from Deng Xiaoping. We should understand that in the future it may be that we need to begin to think about dealing with different issues in a different way. I am not going to go into that now or make that speech now, but I am going to suggest respectfully to the Senator from North Carolina that our administration is on a sensible course that is sensitive to this change in the region, sensitive to other decisions that other countries are making. Let me give an example of one. The Prime Minister of France just recently decided that he is not only visiting China but that they made a new decision on the sale of weapons to Taiwan, and they are going into China. What you see is raw economic power speaking. You are going to see that, I suggest, more and more in the relationships of countries in that region as they emerge as huge producers and suppliers for the rest of the world and as a major market for infrastructure, for communications, for enormous opportunities to change. I am not sure the United States can go it alone, if you will, with unilateral, sort of gun-at-the-head policies that open up the opportunities for a whole lot of other countries to go do what they want to do while we sit here tying things to certain standards of behavior that others are not willing to necessarily stand up for and which raise serious questions about the international community's resolve on these issues. That, too, is another issue. The fact is the amendment of the Senator from North Carolina fundamentally makes mischief with the current policy of this administration that is stronger than the policy of the prior two administrations and that is working. We in the Senate should not send China a mixed message that somehow suggests that the track the administration is on does not have the support of the Congress or has not been working. That would be contrary to reality, and it would also be contrary to common sense in terms of the course that we are on. The bottom line is, and I say this with great respect to the Senator from North Carolina because he and I have worked on human rights issues with respect to Latin America and other parts of the world and I agree with him on his concern for it, but his concern is being met by this administration, which has cleverly focused on human rights within the context of MFN, heightened the visibility on those issues, achieved already some measure of progress toward meeting it, and has proven its willingness to follow through on the two other areas of trade and of missile proliferation. I respectfully suggest to the Senator that his amendment is unnecessary if his goal is truly to send a strong message to China, and his amendment is certainly unnecessary if its goal is simply to try to prove a political point that is both inappropriate and unjustifiable. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, before I begin, let me make it clear to the Chair and anybody else that might be listening, including the folks watching on television, that John Kerry and I are very, very good friends. We do not belong to the same party. We do not have exactly the same philosophy. But as far as I know, we have always agreed to disagree agreeably. I sat in the cloakroom and listened to a good part of his rebuttal to my comments about the pending amendment. Then I went down, and got a bowl of clam chowder. I recommend it, if you have not had lunch. It is not Boston clam chowder, but it is very good. But it sort of surprised me when the Senator from Massachusetts said that I was transparent, whatever that means, in offering this amendment. I guess what I am saying is we ought to have truth in advertising. But that is neither here nor there. I would say to my friend that if the administration is doing all of the fine things he said it is doing with reference to relations with China, then he ought to welcome this amendment and be just as enthusiastic for it now as he was when George Mitchell, the distinguished majority leader, offered his legislation back during the Bush administration. I do not see why it is a matter of such sensitivity for the administration to be differed with on this matter, because I differed with my administration. I did it publicly, and I did it on this floor, when George Bush was President. And I am still doing it. I would do it right now. If I offended the Senator by criticizing the Clinton administration, I am sorry.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, will the Senator simply yield for a dialog on this?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Sure.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The Senator asks a good question. Why would you not, if the administration is doing all these good things, want to accept the amendment that the Senator has offered? The answer to that is that the Senator's amendment--I do not disagree with anything the Senator has in the amendment in terms of substance, as I just described.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  The Senator from Massachussetts voted for it.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The Senator is correct, Madam President. I did indeed vote for it. I pressed for each of these items today. The reason I say to the Senator that I would not want to embrace it in the form the Senator has it here is that it conditions MFN on all of those items, and the President has chosen to condition MFN on the human rights but push the other two items separately. That is the distinction. It is an approach.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I have the floor. We are just talking in a friendly fashion.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I agree.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  That is not what the current President said, Madam President, when he was campaigning in 1992. He just lambasted Bush. And as I said in my remarks, I applauded what he said. Did I not say that?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, the Senator from North Carolina certainly did say that. He probably said a lot of things in his own campaign that he might not want to be held accountable for today if they were absolutely followed through on. All I am saying to the Senator from North Carolina is if the President is achieving what the Senator from North Carolina wants, is it more important to simply go back to the campaign and try to formulate a policy around that, or is it important to embrace the fact that he is accomplishing what the Senator wants?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  If my friend will yield, I am not suggesting we go back to the campaign at all. I am just pointing out that the President took a stronger position then. If he wants to get some others, including the distinguished chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, who are especially interested in this China/MFN matter, and privately tell us what he is doing that is so great, I will keep it a secret. I will not discuss it with the media or anybody else. But I am just operating on what I am able to see, just as we operated when George Bush was President.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, if the Senator will yield, I will both answer him and ask him a question. He has asked me what the President is doing that is so great. I have listed precisely how every component, the Senator's human rights components, of this is embraced in the Executive order. So the President is doing nothing differently from what the Senator proposed in his amendment. He is doing nothing differently in his Executive order. The only other two items in the Senator's amendment pertain to missile technology which he is addressing in the same track with sanctions. The question of the missile technology is one side, and the trade issue is being dealt with on a separate track. The trade issue, as the Senator knows, we just had this very significant clash over the textiles. They are prepared to bring extremely strong sanctions against China. They had emergency meetings, and before the January 15 deadline China backed down. So each of the concerns expressed by the Senator from North Carolina are in fact not only being addressed but are embraced in the current policy.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Then the Senator from Massachussetts ought to have no objection to the amendment. Let us just pass it over a voice vote and be done with it.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  If I may say to the Senator, clearly what the Senator is doing is trying to change the administration's approach as it is stated to the Chinese and as it is, indeed. The Senator shakes his head. But the Senator is taking back trade and taking back missile technology and conditioning MFN specifically on both of those. That is the language here.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, I beg my friend's pardon. Maybe, like the three blind men from Hindustan who were trying to describe an elephant, each of us is seeing it our way. But China is sitting back laughing at us. They are sitting back laughing at us, and they are going to continue to do things that this amendment addresses. Let me say that I applaud thus far the position that the administration has taken with respect to textiles. But that hand has not been played out yet, I say to the Senator. And there is nothing wrong with saying, and this Senate said, ``Just a minute here, Red China. This is the way we still feel.'' The former Federal Judge and the distinguished majority leader said it right. I think we ought to just keep on saying it until they do.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  If my friend from North Carolina will stay with me for a moment here--
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I will stay with my friend as long as I am in the Senate.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I thank the Senator for that. Madam President, the first sentence of the Senator's amendment--and I know he knows it, but I want to put it in the Record--says: Policy regarding the conditions which the Government of the People's Republic of China should meet to continue to receive nondiscriminatory most-favored-nation treatment. In other words, that follows; in the Senator's amendment are conditions which China must meet to get MFN. What the Senator is saying is that missile technology behavior and trade policy behavior are part of whether or not they get MFN. President Clinton has distinctly separated those three tracts. He has conditioned MFN on the human rights record.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  If the Senator will defer a moment, I want to be sure the Chair knows who has the floor. Will the Chair state it?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from North Carolina has the floor.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I will not abuse the Senator's time.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  No, No. I just wanted that clear.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  So when the Senator says to me: Why should we not just pass this? Why should we not accept this? Why would the President not want to embrace this? It is because the President has personally decided he thinks he can get more out of China and progress further by tying MFN to human rights and by proceeding in two other forums, to discuss the issue of the missile technology and the issue of the trade labor violations. I respectfully say to my colleague that is working. And to now change it in one fell swoop in the U.S. Senate and try to send a contrary message would, No. 1, be an inappropriate and a wrongful intrusion by the Senate in the prerogatives of the President. No. 2, it would be contrary to good, common sense, in view of the fact that what the President is doing is working. So if the Senator really wants to achieve what is in here, I would like to join with him. I suggest that we try to construct a message to China and let us see if we can join jointly now on the floor to put together a message that embraces all of what the Senator is trying to say here, which is that China must improve in these areas. I agree with the Senator. Let us contain each of the sections of human rights, which we know to be of importance to us, which the President has set forward in the Executive order; but let us respect the right of the President to proceed in these two other courses, while simultaneously saying to China, as we ought to, that we expect improvement in this area of missile technology, transfer, and in proliferation, and we expect improvement with respect to the section of trade violations. If we did that, I think we would wind up sending the very message he is seeking to send to China without being disruptive to the policy of the administration. That would be constructive for the Senate.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Is the Senator finished?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I ask the Senator if he would be interested in pursuing that?
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I will entertain anything the Senator would bring to me. He is a very bright, young man, and I enjoy working with him, but----
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The Senator has been extremely gracious, and I appreciate the time.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  What we are talking about is an Executive order which can be changed tomorrow. By the way, I am not among those who would abdicate this matter to the executive branch, because we have a responsibility. Otherwise, we would not be called upon to vote on MFN. So we do have a stake in this thing, and we do have a responsibility. I am not prepared to surrender my responsibilities. The Executive order requires only a ``no'' recommendation if China does not adhere to the 1992 labor agreement and if China cannot meet the Jackson-Vanik waiver. That is it. Everything else is merely something to be considered. If China does nothing, under this Executive order, the Secretary of State is not required to issue a ``no'' recommendation. So where does that leave the Senate of the United States? Out in left field, if we do nothing. I think we ought to take a stand. If the President wants to say to the hierarchy over in Beijing that you have these fellows like Jesse Helms in the U.S. Senate requiring this, that is fine. You and I are going to work this out--and nobody will applaud louder than I when we are done. But in the meantime, I do not think we ought to relinquish our stand one iota. The Executive order, by the way--we researched that a little bit--is substantially weaker than S. 806. My amendment is only a sense of the Senate. The Senator is correct, and I intended that; but even though most senses of the Senate are like kissing your sister, they do not mean anything, in this case it means something because it is conveyed to the people who need it conveyed to, that we are watching, in addition to the State Department and the executive branch in general. Does the Senator want my amendment to be stronger than it is?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, this Senator would enjoy working with the Senator from North Carolina to try to see if we cannot construct a message. And I think we ought to send a message. I do not think we ought to have the MFN debate now. I do not think that we ought to construct a new MFN policy now. I think we ought to try to find a way to constructively bolster the efforts of the administration, recognizing that this debate is going to occur in 3 or 4 months. We are going to have this debate on the floor of the Senate. The administration is going to have to make this judgment. This is not yet the time for it.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  And we are going to have to make this judgment.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Yes. I recommend respectfully, Madam President, to my colleague that we try to construct now a message that is less confrontational internally between us and more constructive externally toward the Chinese, that all Senators could join together on this bill, which is not really the appropriate moment to have the MFN debate. I think that would be a constructive effort, and I would like to work with the Senator to do that.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Does the Senator----
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I do not want to diminish any of the concepts that are contained within the bill that I once voted for, and that is the essence of our approach. It is just a question of the formulation and structure of it.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Does the Senator contemplate having that ready for us to examine by maybe Monday morning?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I think that would be appropriate.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Let me say again that I am always interested in hearing what the Senator has to say and what he has to propose. It would be foolish for me to take any other position. But I do not quite understand, nor do I share the Senator's position that we ought not to be confrontational with the Communist Chinese.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  No. I beg to differ. It is not a question of--I am talking about confrontational between ourselves and our administration.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  The Senator is suggesting that I am being confrontational with whom?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  The Senator is suggesting that the policy contained within the Senator's amendment is, by definition, confrontational with current policy, because the Senator is proposing a different approach than the administration, a different approach only in structure, not in substance.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I have the floor. But I will say to the Senator that I do not quite understand his position on that because this is a very fine document written by and introduced by a distinguished majority leader of the Senate in April 1993. True enough it was first introduced during a different set of circumstances with a different President. But as I have said ad nauseam so many times, I disagreed with President Bush. He had gone over to China and he had certain attitudes which I understood, and I am not trying to say yea, yea, yea, you said so and so. I just thought George Mitchell was right then, and I think what he said then is right now. I do not see where it is unacceptably confrontational.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I have the floor. I am glad to yield to the Senator.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I was about to ask the Senator to do that.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Yes.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  If I could simply say, George Mitchell was right then and he is right now. These are indeed strong sentiments that we ought to be expressing. The problem, and I say again, is the administration has appropriately chosen, appropriately in the sense that it is their right and they initiate foreign policy, and has appropriately chosen to try a new initiative with the Chinese, a new dialog. That new dialog is predicated on the notion that they separate out the missile proliferation questions and the labor standards trade questions, they will separate them from the human rights, but all of the same concepts contained in Senator Mitchell's original bill, which I voted for, the Senator from North Carolina voted for, we voted for, all of those concepts are contained in the current policy. They are simply being offered in a different framework. The amendment of the Senator tries to bring them back into one framework, and that is the bone of contention. That is what is creating the confrontation. The administration does not want to put them in one House. They think they can be more successful in achieving what the Senator wants by proceeding down the two tracks. I am merely saying let us try to see if we can embrace the goals that we want to achieve, send a strong message to the Chinese, but do it in a way that emboldens the administration and frankly empowers them to be able to achieve what we want, rather than send a decisive note. I think we can do that, and I would like to try.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I hope we can. Nothing would suit me better than to take an honorable position against what is going on in Red China. Do not pussyfoot around as happened during the Bush administration when those guys went over there and drank the champaign. I did not like that at all. They ground that student under that tank, made mush out of him, and all other sorts of things. And the latest--do we have the latest human rights report somewhere? They are not doing a thing on human rights, nothing. Freedom House ranked Communist China as 1 of the terrible 20 human rights abusers along with North Korea, Iran, Cuba, Vietnam, and Afghanistan, among others. If the Senator is going to try to share with me and encourage me to join him in a draft that does not offend some of the people in Beijing, I do not believe I can accept that, but let us look at what you have. Now, I looked at the parliamentary situation after I read for the first time that we were not going to have any votes after the two we had earlier. I had not been notified about that until I saw it over there and over there. I do not know whether the Senator knew that. I thought we could have a vote this afternoon on this. But you have a right to second degree whether I go along or not. But if the Senator is suggesting to me that he and I work together and our respective staffs work together and try to come up with something that is meaningful, I accept his offer with gratitude.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, may I say to the Senator I appreciate his willingness to try to do that. I think that is an important way for us to proceed and if we cannot have a meeting of the minds, obviously, as the Senator said, I do have a right to second degree.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Sure.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I would want to protect that right, but I hope it is not necessary. I think it would be good for us to send a message. My own opinion is, and I can tell you this from having come back and met with the Chinese, what is in the Executive order offends them.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I am glad.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  And the Senator should be glad. So I am saying that there is plenty already on the table that they could find offensive, and it seems to me that there is a way for us to put together an approach here that ought to recommend the best intentions of the Senate without undoing the next 3 or 4 months of effort of this administration. That is not a long time, I think, for the Senator to wait to make the measurement that we are all going to make. This issue is going to be joined in in a short period of time. I would hate to see us get hung up over it here today.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I do not propose that we do. Now, my folks are passing me notes just as the Senator's folks are passing him notes.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I did not have a chance to read my notes.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I confess a lot of what I know is in their heads. But the point that they suggest that I make to the Senator at this moment is that the President's Executive order and the President's report to Congress that follows that order reflect all of the provisions in the pending amendment.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I beg pardon.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  That is what they say.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I apologize to the Senator. I did not quite hear all of that.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  The Senator is saying we are just packing all the things in and the President is trying to work to this aspect and this aspect and that aspect separately. That is not the way I am advised that the President's Executive order and his report to Congress are comprised.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  I may say respectfully to the Senator in all of the conversations that I had when I was in China I met with our entire staff of field team and I had conversations with their ministry, with various of their ministers. They understand that Executive order to contain all seven of those items. They are, in fact, hearing us reiterate on a consistent, basis because they understand that the Senate is not going to make a judgment based on one or two. The Senate is going to make a judgment on all of those items. In fact, a great concern was expressed by a number of us who were there about the question of progress in those areas. So I do not think if you listen to people in Hong Kong who are concerned about the loss on MFN, or you listen to the Chinese officials or to others, there is no question at this point in time that they have the message that they have not sufficiently responded yet and that there is going to be a high standard applied.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  There is no question in my mind that they sought to persuade the Senator of that. The Senator cannot go into their heads and know what he really is thinking. I think they are smirking behind their hands. But I repeat, it is not valid to say that the President's Executive order and report to Congress depart in any way from the substance of the pending amendment, and I will say again what I said earlier that the Executive order requires only a no recommendation if China fails to comply with the 1992 prison labor agreement, for example, or the Jackson-Vanik waiver. There is no binding human rights requirement. The Executive order is just an Executive order, and the President can withdraw it, change it, do whatever he wants to. But what this Congress does when it approves a resolution, even a resolution which is the sense of the Senate, then that is a matter of record, and that is the way the Senate will be on record. I will tell the Senator to let us see what can be worked out over the weekend. At least as far as I am concerned, I think that I have been stimulated by this conversation with the Senator. I promise the Senator we will take serious note of whatever recommendation the Senator provides to us. Madam President, I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is COATS and he says  Madam President, I rise to support the Helms amendment on Chinese refugees. I commend Senator Helms for taking action to correct this flaw in U.S. policy. We cannot ignore this particular abuse of its citizens by the Chinese Government when we have the power to help. As we have seen, the Chinese Government has stepped up its repression of their people through policies which force families to limit their children to one. They do this by forcing women to undergo abortions, and both men and women to be sterilized. Many women are even cruelly forced to have abortions often late in term in order to prosecute this one-child policy. Earlier this year we heard reports of another new horror taking place in China. In order to ensure the births of only perfect babies, a new Chinese law would require mothers to undergo genetic testing of their fetuses. This is a requirement, not a voluntary personal choice as in the United States. Even more horrible is the fact that, should the results of these test reveal that the child might be born with a disability, the mother is forced to terminate the pregnancy. I don't think anyone will disagree that these measures are abominable. While we may have no power to dictate Chinese policy, we can acknowledge the fear which moves them to escape such oppressive policies by helping them enter the United States. This amendment would grant asylum to those Chinese who come to the United States because they fear persecution by China for refusing to abort a pregnancy or undergo sterilization. It gives this group of refugees equivalent status as those fleeing for political dissent. Madam President, in 1989, Members may recall an amendment dealing with this same subject we voted on in this body which passed 95 to 0. The language of the Helms amendment is identical to that language. Although the 1989 vote followed closely after the Chinese massacre of students at Tiananmen Square, we should be no less willing today to take action to assist people on whom an enormous injustice is being perpetrated. Until a year ago it was a matter of Justice Department Policy to grant favorable immigration status to Chinese coming to the United States under these circumstances. However, President Clinton chose to reverse this decision, and rescinded a directive issued by Attorney General William Barr shortly before he left office which laid out the implementing regulations. For a year now it has been United States policy to deport Chinese who fled China's coercive one-child per family policy. I frankly couldn't understand why President Clinton made such a decision. Although a recent case involving a Chinese man who left China revealed his reasoning. The Clinton Justice Department wrote in its brief that involuntary sterilization was not a manifestation of Communist Doctrine, a punishment for Chinese dissidents, or a form of persecution on the basis of political opinion because Guo had not be singled out for persecution. China's population policies, the administration reasoned, were applied equally to all citizens and therefore he could not be viewed as a political dissenter. Fortunately, the Federal judge in Alexandria ruled against the administration in a decision handed down on January 20. He declared that ``Political opinion encompasses an individual's views regarding procreation.'' He called China's policy of involuntary sterilization an egregious infringement on the fundamental right to procreate. Accordingly, the judge ruled that Guo's opposition to Chinese practice equals political opinion. Madam President, I don't think we needed a Federal judge to tell us that opposing China policy on forced abortions and sterilization is akin to political dissent. I know that many of my colleagues are concerned that such a policy would open the doors to thousands of Chinese immigrants entering the United States But the facts do not bear this out. According to statistics from 1992, 4,803 refugees from China were apprehended by the INS. Of this number, 654 were given grants of asylum by immigration judges. Although the INS did not keep strict statistics on the asylum claims, rough estimates indicate that only about 100 applied for asylum based on fear of the forced abortion policies. Even if the numbers were double that or more it would hardly be an overwhelming number to bring such concern. In any event, this amendment limits the numbers who can apply for asylum on this claim to 1,000 a year. Madam President, the issue at stake is not one of whether one supports or opposes abortion, but rather one of respect for human rights. It is time we recognized the horror of these programs of coercion in China, and took a stand on behalf of people willing to risk everything to evade this type of oppression. I hope Members will once again be willing to cast a vote, as 95 Members did in 1989, and extend to these Chinese a preferential immigration status.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Massachusetts.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I would ask by way of video whether or not there are any collegues prepared to bring any amendments to the floor at this time. We may have an en bloc amendment that we are prepared to proceed forward on.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  Madam President, I have some remarks on the amendment concerning Senator Helms, if I may speak for a moment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Rhode Island.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  Madam President, Senator Helms and I have stood together over the years in our condemnation of China's noncompliance with international weapons treaties, to their horrific human rights record in Tibet and against their own people, to their use of forced labor and unfair trade practices and so on. We share a deep regard and affection for His Holiness the Dalai Lama and together have welcomed him on several occasions to the Foreign Relations Committee. We have cosponsored legislation providing for VOA broadcasts, Fulbright scholarships, and sense-of-the-Senate resolutions expressing our support to those suffering under oppressive Chinese rule and urging a United States policy that would put some teeth in our commitment to back them up. However, I do not support Senator Helm's amendment to increase the conditions China must meet before MFN can be renewed this spring. Every provision in this amendment is a good one, and China should comply with them all. But we should not build United States-China relations solely around MFN. President Clinton, in consultation with the Congress, carefully crafted last year's MFN renewal to be an effective tool for improving China's human rights performance. We have seen some incremental improvements and have good reason to believe that we will see more. We are now 6 months into the 1-year conditional MFN extension, I do not believe we would be operating in good faith to up the ante at the half way point and still permit us to up the ante at some future date, if we so choose.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, may I inquire of the distinguished Senator from Massachusetts where we stand with respect to the en bloc amendments?
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, we are prepared to proceed forward on the en bloc amendments, if we want to do that.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  I would like to get that out of the way. amendments nos. 1292 through 1314, en bloc
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that it be in order to send to the desk en bloc 23 amendments. I ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to their immediate consideration en bloc; that the amendments be agreed to en bloc and the motions to reconsider be laid upon the table en bloc; and that explanatory statements regarding these amendments be printed in the Record as if read.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, I will simply observe, lest anybody wants to know what is going on with 23 amendments being adopted en bloc, these are technical amendments and they do not address any substantive areas of the bill.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  The Senator is absolutely correct. Have we voted on those amendments?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The amendments have been agreed to. The amendments (Nos. 1292 through 1314), en bloc, are as follows: amendment no. 1292 Technical Amendments to S. 1281 SEC. 101(b). LIMITATIONS. In subsection 101(b)(1)(A), page 8, line 8, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; In subsection 101(b)(1)(B), page 8, line 13, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; In subsection 101(b)(2), page 8, line 20, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; and In subsection 101(b)(3), page 9, line 1, strike ``available'', and insert ``appropriated''. SEC. 104. MIGRATION AND REFUGEE ASSISTANCE. In subsection (A)(1)(B), page 12, line 13, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''. SEC. 114. INTERNATIONAL LITIGATION FUND. Strike the two sentences starting on page 18, line 3 and ending on page 18, line 7 (viz., ``The ILF shall be available to such extent and in such amounts as may be provided in advance in appropriations Acts. Amounts so provided are authorized to remain available without fiscal year limitation.'') and insert the following: ``The ILF may be available without fiscal year limitation. Funds otherwise available to the Department for the purposes of this paragraph may be credited to the ILF.''. SEC. 115. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATORY CONTRACTS. In subsection (b), on page 21, line 4, strike ``on'' and insert ``of''; and In subsection (d), on page 23, line 1, strike ``OF'' and insert ``AND''. SEC. 116. EMERGENCIES IN THE DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICE. Insert after ``striking'' the following: ````and the Foreign Service''; and by striking''. SEC. 118. VISAS. In section 118(a)(3), on page 25, line 10, strike ``$56,000,000'' and insert ``$107,500,000''; and At the end of subsection (a), on page 25, after line 10, add the following new paragraph: ``(4) The provisions of the Act of August 18, 1856 (Revised Statutes 1726-28; 22 U.S.C. 2212-14) concerning accounting for consular fees shall not apply to fees collected under this subsection.''. SEC. 119. ROLE OF THE FOREIGN SERVICE INSTITUTE. Strike everything after the section title and insert the following: Chapter 7 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 is amended-- (1) in the chapter title, by sriking ``Foreign Service Institute,''; (2) in section 701 (22 U.S.C. 4021)-- (A) by striking the section title and inserting ``Institution for Training.''; (B) in subsection 701(a)-- (i) by striking ``the Foreign Service Institute (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the ``Institute'')'' and inserting ``an institution or center for training (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the ``institution'')''; and (ii) by striking ``Institute'' and inserting ``institution''; (C) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) The Secretary of State is authorized to provide for special professional foreign affairs training and instruction of employees of foreign governments through the institution. ``(2) Training and instruction under paragraph (1) shall be on a reimbursable or advance-of-funds basis. Such reimbursements or advances to the Department of State may be provided by an agency of the United States Government or by a foreign government and shall be credited to the currently available applicable appropriation account. ``(3) Training should be made available in the first instance to officials from newly emerging democratic nations, and then to other nations as deemed to be in the national interest of the United States. ``(4) The authorities of section 704 shall apply to training and instruction provided under this section.''; (3) in subsection 701(b) and sections 702, 704, 705, and 707, by striking ``Foreign Service Institute'' and ``Institute'' wherever they appear and inserting ``institution''. SEC. 131. UNDER SECRETARY AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSITIONS. In subsection (b), on page 32, line 24, insert ``of'' before ``title''; and In subsection (e), on page 35, line 5, strike, ``of new office''. SEC. 133. REDESIGNATION OF POSITION AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND LABOR. Strike subsection (b) on page 38; Redesignate subsection (c) on page 38 as ``(b)''; and In the newly redesignated subsection (b), strike ``of new office''. SEC. 142. WAIVER OF LIMITATION FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS. In subsection (a), page 48, line 16, strike ``arise from'' and insert ``in circumstances where there is in effect''. SEC. 147. EDUCATIONAL TRAVEL FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS STUDYING ABROAD. In subsection (b), page 52, line 6, insert the following after ``enrolled'': ``, with the allowable travel expense not to exceed the cost of travel to and from the school in the United States''. SEC. 154. FOREIGN LANGUAGE TRANSLATOR AND INTERPRETER CAREER SERVICE PROGRAM. In subsection (e), on page 64, line 2, strike ``(1)''; In subsection (e), on page 64, line 9, strike the entire line and insert ``(f) Use of Funds.--''; Funds collected under the authority of subsections (d) and''; In newly designated subsection (f), on page 64, line 16, add the following at the end: ``Such funds may remain available until expended.''; and On page 64, lines 17-19, strike subsection (f). SEC. 169. REPORT ON UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING ACTIVITIES. At the beginning of the section, on page 76, line 11, strike ``Not'' and insert the following: ``(a) Except as modified by subsection (b), not''; On page 76, line 19, insert before the period ``for the previous fiscal year''; On page 76, line 22, strike ``as of the date of'' and insert ``covered by''; On page 76, line 23, insert ``such'' before ``peacekeeping''; and On page 77, insert the following new subsection at the end of section 169: ``(b) The first report submitted pursuant to this section shall cover all United Nations peacekeeping operations up to the date of the report.'' SEC. 170. UNITED STATES PERSONNEL AND MATERIAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS. Strike section 170 in its entirety. SEC. 214. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATORY CONTRACTS. In subsection (b), on page 110, line 10, strike ``on'' and insert ``of''; and In subsection (d), on page 112, line 9, strike ``OF'' and insert ``AND''. SEC. 704. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO CAPTIVE NATIONS RESOLUTION. Strike section 704 in its entirety. SEC. 710. ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS AGAINST NORTH KOREA. Strike subsection (b) on page 176 and insert the following: ``(b) Waiver.--The President may waive the application of subsection (a) if the President determines that such a waiver would serve the national interest.''. At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``SEC. . PUBLISHING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS. Section 112a of title 1 of the United States Code is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' immediately before ``The Secretary of State''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(b) The Secretary of State may determine that publication of certain categories of agreements is not required, provided that the following criteria are met: ``(1) such agreements are not treaties which have been brought into force for the United States after having received Senate advice and consent pursuant to section 2(2) of Article II of the Constitution of the United States; ``(2) the public interest in such agreements is insufficient to justify their publication, in that (i) as of the date of enactment of this legislation,the agreements are no longer in force, (ii) the agreements do not create private rights or duties, nor establish standards intended to govern government action in the treatment of private individuals; (iii) in view of the limited or specialized nature of the public interest in such agreements, such interest can adequately be satisfied by an alternative means; or (iv) the public disclosure of the text of the agreement would, in the opinion of the President, be prejudicial to the national security of the United States; and ``(3) copies of such agreements (other than those in subsection (2)(b)(iv)), including certified copies where necessary for litigation or similar purposes, can be made available by the Department of State union reasonable request. ``(c) Any determination pursuant to subsection (b) shall be published in the Federal Register.''. At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``Sec. . Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.--The President is authorized to implement, for the United States, the provisions of Annex 1 of the Decision concerning Legal Capacity and Privileges and Immunities, issued by the Council of Ministers of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe on December 1, 1993, in accordance with the terms of that Annex.'' At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``Sec. . Agreement on State and Local Taxation.--The President is authorized to bring into force for the United States the Agreement on State and Local Taxation of Foreign Employees of Public International Organizations, which was signed by the United States on April 21, 1992: Provided, That, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1.B of such Agreement, such Agreement shall not require any refunds of monies paid with respect to tax years ending on or before December 31, 1993.'' SEC. XX. FEES FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICES. Title I of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2669 et seq.) is amended by adding the following new section at the end: ``SEC. 52. FEES FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICES. ``(a) Authority To Charge Fee.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary of State is authorized to charge a fee to cover the actual or estimated cost of providing any person, firm or organization (other than agencies of the United States Government) with commercial services at posts abroad on matters within the authority of the Department of State. ``(2) The authority of this section may be exercised only in countries where the Department of Commerce does not perform commercial services for which it collects fees. ``(b) use of Fees.--Funds collected under the authority of subsection (a) shall be deposited as an offsetting collection to any Department of State appropriation to recover the costs of providing commercial services.'' ``SEC. . PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS ABROAD. ``Section 2(c) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2669(c)) is amended by inserting the following before the period: ``; and such contracts are authorized to be negotiated, the terms of the contracts to be prescribed, and the work to be performed, where necessary, without regard to such statutory provisions as relate to the negotiation, making, and performance of contracts and performance of work in the United States''. At the appropriate place in the bill, insert the following new section: ``SEC. . UNITED STATES MEMBERSHIP IN THE INTERNATIONAL COPPER STUDY GROUP. (a) United States Membership.--The President is authorized to accept the Terms of Reference of and maintain membership of the United States in the International Copper Study Group (ICSG). (b) Payments of Assessed Contributions.--For fiscal year 1995 and thereafter the United States assessed contributions to the ICSG may be paid from funds appropriated for ``Contributions to International Organizations''. Amendment to section 154, Foreign Language Translator and Interpreter Career Service Program. In subsection (e), on page 64, lines 6-9, strike ``for which the Secretary of State has determined for purposes of subsection (b)(2) there is a shortage of qualified Government personnel''; On page 64, lines 12-14, strike ``for which the Secretary has determined there is a shortage of qualified Government personnel''. amendment no. 1293 (Purpose: To update the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989) On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. . AMENDMENTS TO THE PLO COMMITMENTS COMPLIANCE ACT. The PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989 (title VIII of Public Law 101-246) is amended-- (1) in section 804(b), by striking ``Beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 120 days thereafter in which the dialogue between the United States and the PLO has not been discontinued'', and inserting in lieu thereof ``In conjunction with each written policy justification required under section (3)(b)(1) of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994 or every 180 days,''; (2) in section 804(b)(1), by striking ``regarding the cessation of terrorism and recognition of Israel's right to exist'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``and each of the commitments described in section (4)(A) of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994 (Oslo commitments)''; (3) in section 804(b)(2), by inserting ``and Oslo'' after ``Geneva''; (4) by striking paragraphs (3) and (8) of section 804(b); (5) by redesignating paragraphs (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), and (10) of section 804(b) as paragraphs (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8), respectively of that section; (6) in section 802(8), by inserting ``and on September 9, 1993'' after ``1998''; (7) in section 802, by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (10); (8) by striking ``and'' at the end of section 802(7); and (9) by inserting after section 802(7) the following: ``(8) the President, following an attempted terrorist attack upon a Tel Aviv beach on May 30, 1990, suspended the United States dialogue with the PLO; ``(9) the President resumed the United States dialogue with the PLO in response to the commitments made by the PLO in letters to the Prime Minister of Israel and the Foreign Minister of Norway of September 9, 1993; and''.
 
The speaker is MACK and he says  Madam President, I rise to join my colleague and friend from Connecticut, Senator Lieberman, to offer this amendment updating the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989. All of us were moved by the historic ceremony on the White House lawn on September 13, 1993. None of us ever thought we would see the day that the Prime Minister of Israel and the head of the PLO shaking hands and their representatives signing the same document. Today, 4 months later, the euphoria that many felt at that moment has dimmed, but we knew in our hearts that it would. We knew that it would be a long road to true peace and security for the tiny State of Israel. We knew that we would have to be vigilant and make sure that the commitments made by Yasser Arafat be kept, or the peace process would collapse in another wave of violence. We also remembered that almost 5 years before, at a press conference in Geneva on December 14, 1988, Yasser Arafat made some of the same commitments he made this September. At that time he committed to end terror, recognize Israel, and accept U.N. Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338. In response, the Secretary of State George Shultz opened the first official U.S.-PLO dialog. A few months later the U.S. Congress, skeptical that Arafat would in fact keep his commitments, passed the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989. That bill, also known as the Mack/Lieberman bill, required the State Department to submit a detailed report to Congress three times a year regarding the PLO's compliance with the Geneva commitments. In the following months, the State Department did submit reports that tended to gloss over numerous terrorist attacks against Israel, on the grounds that PLO responsibility for those attacks could not be proven. Then, on May 30, 1990, came a massive attempted terrorist attack against the beaches of Tel Aviv. The attack was thwarted, but clearly would have been deadly and clearly was carried out by mainstream PLO elements. Since the State Department could not report to Congress that the PLO was abiding by its commitments, President Bush ended the U.S./ PLO dialog. This brings us to today. On September 9, 1993, Yasser Arafat signed two letters, one to the Prime Minister of Israel Yitzhak Rabin, the other to the late Foreign Minister of Norway Johan Holst. In those letters the PLO committed to: First, recognize the right of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security; second, accept United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338; third, renounce the use of terrorism and other acts of violence; fourth, assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators; fifth, call upon the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to take part in the steps leading to the normalization of life, rejecting violence and terrorism, and contributing to peace and stability; and sixth, submit amendments in the Palestine National Council [PNC] to the Palestinian Covenant deleting provisions inconsistent with Israel's right to exist. The first three commitments were also made just 5 years ago in Geneva by the same person, Yasser Arafat. The last three commitments--to take responsibility over all PLO elements, to call for an end to the ``intifada'' against Israel, and to amend the PLO covenant--are new, but are in effect measures to implement and give reality to the first three commitments. This time, the PLO's commitments were not made in a vacuum, but in the context of the Israel/PLO Declaration of Principles and the handshake on the White House lawn. This time, we have higher hopes that the PLO's commitments will be kept. But we must be no less vigilant. The day after the Arafat letters were signed outlining the six commitments, Senator Lieberman and I spoke with and wrote to Secretary Christopher to urge the administration to renew reporting under the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989. Secretary Christopher agreed that the reporting, which ended when the U.S./PLO dialogue was suspended in 1990, should be resumed. On January 11, 1994, the State Department sent to Congress the first report since the reopening of the U.S. dialogue with the PLO. While it was a serious report, Senator Lieberman and I were concerned that it did not deal frankly enough with serious deficiencies in the PLO's compliance over the past few months. Further, the report suffered from the fact that it was not explicitly tied to the six commitments made in September, but to the less explicit 1988 Geneva commitments. Madam President, the Congress and the administration must monitor and demand that the PLO abide by all its commitments, particularly those that go to the heart of recognizing Israel's right to exist in peace and security. If the PLO is truly committed to living side by side with Israel and end terrorism, then why has it not amended its covenant, which repeatedly calls for Israel's utter destruction? Why does the PLO symbol on stationery signed by Arafat picture a map of ``Palestine'' that encompasses all of Israel? Why does Arafat refuse to consistently condemn all terrorism by Hamas and rejectionist PLO elements? Most importantly, if we don't frankly take the PLO to task for less than full compliance, why should the PLO improve its behavior? The purpose of this amendment is to update the PLO Commitments Compliance Act by requiring the State Department to report on PLO compliance with all six September 1993 commitments. With the law so amended, I hope the next State Department report will report on PLO behavior with more specificity and frankness, which will in turn help ensure better PLO compliance with its commitments. This amendment also provides for future reports to be submitted at the same time as the written justifications required under the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act, but no less than every 6 months if no such justification is submitted. The amendment also updates the findings section of the law to reflect the suspension and resumption of the dialogue since the law passed in 1989. I ask for adoption of the amendment and I ask unanimous consent that the following documents be included in the Record at this point: First, September 9, 1993, letters from Yasser Arafat to Prime Minister Rabin and Foreign Minister Holst; second, September 10, 1993, letter from Senators Mack and Lieberman to Secretary Christopher; third, January 10, 1994, State Department Report on PLO Compliance, fourth, January 24, 1994, letter from Senators Mack and Lieberman to Secretary Christopher. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: September 9, 1993. Yitzhak Rabin, Prime Minister of Israel. Prime Minister: The signing of the Declaration of Principles marks a new era in the history of the Middle East. In firm conviction thereof, I would like to confirm the following PLO commitments: The PLO recognizes the right of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security. The PLO accepts United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338. The PLO commits itself to the Middle East peace process, and to a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the two sides and declares that all outstanding issues relating to permanent status will be resolved through negotiations. The PLO considers that the signing of the Declaration of Principles constitutes a historic event, inaugurating a new epoch of peaceful coexistence, free from violence and all other acts which endanger peace and stability. Accordingly, the PLO renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of violence and will assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators. In view of the promise of a new era and the signing of the Declaration of Principles and based on Palestinian acceptance of Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, the PLO affirms that those articles of the Palestinian Covenant which deny Israel's right to exist, and the provisions of the Covenant which are inconsistent with the commitments of this letter are now inoperative and no longer valid. Consequently, the PLO undertakes to submit to the Palestinian National Council for formal approval the necessary changes in regard to the Palestinian Covenant. Sincerely, Yasser Arafat, Chairman, the Palestine Liberation Organization. ____ September 9, 1993. His Excellency Johan Jorgen Holst, Foreign Minister of Norway. Dear Minister Holst: I would like to confirm to you that, upon the signing of the Declaration of Principles, I will include the following positions in my public statements. In light of the new era marked by the signing of the Declaration of Principles, the PLO encourages and calls upon the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to take part in the steps leading to the normalization of life, rejecting violence and terrorism, contributing to peace and stability and participating actively in shaping reconstruction, economic development and cooperation. Sincerely, Yasser Arafat, Chairman, The Palestine Liberation Organization. ____ U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, September 10, 1993. Hon. Warren M. Christopher, Secretary of State, Washington, DC. Dear Secretary: At this historic moment in the long struggle to attain peace in the Middle East, we are writing you as principal sponsors of the legislation which became the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989 to express our encouragement over the recent exchanges between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization. In light of the statements in Arafat's letter of September 9th, we concur that the U.S. conditions for resumption of a dialogue between the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization have been met and that such a dialogue could contribute to achieving the long-stated goals of the United States in this region. His statements appear consistent with the policy approach in Section 803(a) of the Act. With the resumption of the dialogue, we believe that the requirement for periodic reports from your Department to the Congress, as set forth in Section 804 of the Act, concerning PLO policies and actions, including any terrorist incidents, again would come into effect. We are obviously entering an important new period and we believe these reporting provisions can be of assistance in monitoring progress toward a lasting peace. Sincerely, Joseph I. Lieberman. Connie Mack. ____ Report Pursuant of Title VIII of Public Law 101-246, Foreign Relations Authorization Act, January 10, 1994 PLO COMMITMENTS COMPLIANCE ACT--Report on PLO Compliance Background The U.S. dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), initiated in December 1988, was suspended in June 1990 following an attempted terrorist attack on Israel by PLO constituent group. On September 10, 1993, President Clinton announced the United States would resume a dialogue with the PLO on the basis of commitments undertaken in letters of mutual recognition exchanged by Israel and the PLO (attached). President Clinton said the commitments PLO Chairman Arafat set forth in his letter to Israeli Prime Minister Rabin and in a follow up letter to Norwegian Foreign Minister Holst (attached) satisfied the U.S. conditions for resuming the dialogue. President Clinton's September 10 statement is also attached. On September 13 in Washington, the PLO and Israel signed a Declaration of Principles (DOP) on interim self-government arrangements in which the PLO committed to substantive and wide-ranging negotiations with Israel based on UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338. PLO involvement in terrorism and violence June 1990--September 9, 1993 President Bush suspended the U.S.--PLO dialogue in June 1990 following an attempted terrorist seaborne raid on a Tel Aviv beach by Abu Abbas's faction of the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), a PLO constituent group. During the period in which our dialogue with the PLO was suspended (June 1990- September 9, 1993) the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Nayif Hawatmeh's faction of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DELP- Hawatmeh), PLO constituent groups opposed to Arafat's policies, conducted attacks against Israeli civilians in Israel and the occupied territories, including an October 1991 attack by the PFLP on an Israeli bus which killed two Israelis. There are also inconclusive reports that PLO groups loyal to Arafat mounted terrorist operations in Israel and the occupied territories. These include incidents such as a July 1990 pipe bombing in Jerusalem which killed a Canadian national and the February 1992 murder of an Israeli security guard in Eilat. PLO member groups conducted military operations against Israeli forces in southern Lebanon during the June 1990- September 1993 time frame. PLO elements opposed to the peace process also claimed responsibility for several unsuccessful raids into Israel from Lebanon, including attacks by the PFLP in January 1991 and the DFLP in July 1991. An element of Arafat's Fatah may have perpetrated an attempt seaborne raid in September 1991 which resulted in the death of a Lebanon- based Swedish UNIFIL officer. The unidentified assailants never reached Israel and their specific target there is unknown. The Israelis publicly attributed a July 1990 border raid to Fatah and a December 1990 raid to the DFLP-Hawatmeh. PLO groups also fired rockets into Israel on numerous occasions. We have no information that the PLO conducted any attacks against U.S. citizens during this time, nor do we have information that any PLO group engaged in acts of international terrorism (i.e., outside Israel, the occupied territories, and Lebanon). Post-September 10, 1993 In his September 9 letter to Prime Minister Rabin, Arafat affirmed that the PLO recognizes Israel's right to exist in peace and security, accepts UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, and commits itself to a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the two sides. The PLO also ``renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of violence . . .'' Arafat publicly reiterated the PLO's renunciation of violence and terrorism on September 20. He instructed Fatah activists in the territories to halt all violent activity against Israeli and Palestinian targets. The activists appear to have complied with these instructions with two exceptions, the murder of Haim Mizhari on October 29, which Arafat denounced, and the December 31 claim by the Fatah Hawks that they murdered two Israelis in Ramallah. Two of the largest of these activist groups, the Fatah Hawks, a Fatah-affiliated street gang, and the Black Panthers, initially announced they would cease activities against Israelis to comply with Arafat's order. On October 24, Fatah issued a leaflet calling for an end to the torture and execution of suspected collaborators in the West Bank and Gaza. However, as the level of violence has increased on both sides in recent weeks, the Fatah Hawks have threatened to attack Israeli targets in retaliation for IDF sweeps against its members. With the exception of the December 31 claim, and to the best of our knowledge, the group has not conducted an anti-Israeli operation since September 10. In addition, Arafat dismissed a senior Fatah military commander in Lebanon who publicly advocated violent opposition to the DOP. The level of violence in the occupied territories and the West Bank initially declined following the White House signing of the DOP. Since October, however, the number of violent incidents has risen. All but one Palestinian attack (the Mizrahi murder) has been attributed to groups which reject the DOP and are committed to using violence to undermine it. HAMAS and those factions of the Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ) not members of the PLO are responsible for the majority of attacks on Israelis. The PFLP and the Hawatmeh faction of the DFLP are also responsible for some of these attacks. While nominally under the PLO umbrella, the PFLP and the DFLP-Hawatmeh have suspended their participation in the PLO because of their opposition to the DOP. Both the PFLP and the DFLP-Hawatmeh continue to mount military operations against IDF and Southern Lebanon Army (SLA) forces in southern Lebanon. Shortly after the signing of the DOP, the PFLP and DFLP resigned their positions on the Executive Committee, the PLO policy organ, and announced they had ``frozen'' their participation in the PLO to express their opposition to the DOP (although they did not formally withdraw). The two groups have aligned themselves with a number of non-PLO rejectionist elements based in Damascus. Only two incidents, the murder of Israeli settler Haim Mizrahi and the December 31 claim of responsibility by the Fatah Hawks for the murder of two Israelis, has been attributed to a group under Arafat's control. Mizrahi was killed when he stopped to buy eggs at a farm in the West Bank. An Israeli investigation revealed that five members of Fatah--acting on their own and without the foreknowledge of the PLO headquarters in Tunis--were responsible. The Israeli security service apprehended the suspects. Faisal Husseini, the recently-appointed head of Arafat's Fatah in the West Bank, immediately denounced the attack and the individuals responsible. He told journalists that those responsible had violated the PLO's orders and that the PLO would take measures against anyone who violated these orders. Arafat himself responded the following day, saying ``We denounce and condemn the killing of Israeli settler Haim Mizrahi.'' He called on all parties ``to oblige with the agreement and to put an end to all acts of violence for the preservation of peace.'' Despite his declared intention to assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel, Arafat has not denounced the attacks of the PLO groups over which he has no control (specifically, the PFLP and the DFLP-Hawatmeh). The PLO in Tunis does not exercise operational control over these elements and the PLO has not provided funding for them since at least 1991. While calling for the additional denunciations of the violence by the PLO leadership, the Israeli Government has made a distinction between the PLO leadership based in Tunis and rejectionist elements over which Arafat has only nominal control. Since September 10, at least 17 Israelis have been killed by Palestinians in the occupied territories and in Israel. Of those killed, 10 were civilians and 7 were military personnel. Approximately 28 Palestinians have been killed in conflicts with IDF forces, and 5 have been killed by settlers during the same period. Following is a chronological description of the incidents of Palestinian violence since September 10. Most of these incidents involve Palestinian groups which are not part of the PLO and which reject the DOP and the PLO's recognition of Israel. This list is current as of December 31, 1993. September 12: Three Israeli soldiers on a routine patrol near Gaza City were ambushed and killed. Two similar incidents occurred the same day. We have no specific information on other casualties. No one claimed responsibility for any of the incidents. September 13: An Israeli civilian was stabbed in the occupied territories. HAMAS (Islamic Resistance) claimed responsibility for the attack. September 13: A suicide bomber attacked a police station in the occupied territories. The perpetrator died; no Israelis were killed. HAMAS claimed responsibility for the attack. September 14: Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed responsibility for a drive-by shooting on an IDF checkpoint in Gaza. No one was killed. September 22: An Israeli civilian was killed in the West Bank. HAMAS claimed responsibility for the attack. October 1: HAMAS claimed responsibility for a bombing in the West Bank. No one was killed. October 3: HAMAS claimed responsibility for a drive-by shooting attack on a civilian in the occupied territories. October 4: A suicide car bomber attacked an Israeli bus. Several Israeli civilians and military were wounded. HAMAS claimed responsibility for the attack. October 5: PIJ elements attempted to attack a settler camp in the occupied territories. October 7: PIJ attempted a cross-border raid from Lebanon into the occupied territories. October 9: The PFLP claimed responsibility for a failed seaborne raid on northern Israel. October 10: Two Israeli hikers were killed near Jericho. The DFLP, PFLP and HAMAS each claimed responsibility. October 15: An Israeli settler was stabbed by an unidentified Palestinian near Hebron. October 18: The DFLP claimed responsibility for a grenade attack on an IDF patrol near Nabulus. No one was killed; three Palestinians were wounded. October 19: HAMAS claimed responsibility for a shooting attack on an Israeli civilian. No one was killed. October 24: Two Palestinians posing as Orthodox Jews kidnapped and killed two IDF reservists in Gaza. HAMAS claimed responsibility for the attack. October 25: An unidentified Palestinian attempted a car bomb attack. No one was hurt or killed. October 29: Israeli settler Haim Mizrahi was stabbed and killed when he stopped to buy eggs in the West Bank. An Israeli investigation revealed that five members of Fatah, apparently acting independently, were responsible. October 31: An unidentified Palestinian stabbed an Israeli civilian in the occupied territories. November 2: A HAMAS member was responsible for a failed car bomb attack. The driver was killed. November 7: HAMAS and the DFLP each claimed responsibility for a shooting attack on an Israeli settler. The settler was wounded and his Israeli driver was killed. We believe HAMAS is responsible. November 12: A Palestinian belonging to the PIJ stabbed and wounded an Israeli in Gaza. November 13: The DFLP claimed responsibility for an attack on an IDF camp. No Israeli soldiers were hurt or killed. November 15: A settler was attacked by two Palestinians with an ax near the Tomb of Abraham in Hebron. Another settler at the scene shot and killed one of the attackers. The PFLP claimed responsibility for the attack. November 16: An unidentified Palestinian stabbed and wounded an Israeli soldier at a Gaza checkpoint. The perpetrator was shot and killed. November 18: An IDF officer was killed and another wounded in Gaza. Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed responsibility for the attack. November 22: Israeli soldiers wounded a suicide bomber belonging to PIJ who attempted to ram a garbage truck into a Civil Administration (CIVAD) car. No Israelis were hurt or killed; the perpetrator later died of his wounds. December 1: Two Israelis were killed in the West Bank near Al-Birah when they stopped to change a flat tire and were fired on. Two other Israelis were wounded. HAMAS and the DFLP both claimed responsibility for the attack. December 5: A member of the PIJ attempted to hijack a commuter bus near Tel Aviv. An Israeli civilian was killed; off-duty Israeli soldiers later killed the perpetrator. December 6: An Israeli father and son were shot and killed in the West Bank. HAMAS claimed responsibility for the attack. December 7: A member of the PFLP shot and wounded an Israeli settler near Bethlehem. December 10: Three Palestinians attacked and stabbed their Israeli employer in Gaza. The employer was slightly wounded, as was the father of one of the attackers who tried to intervene. December 10: Unidentified Palestinians shot at an Israeli police car from their vehicle. An officer was slightly wounded. December 10: A guard at the headquarters of the Gaza police was shot and wounded. No one has claimed responsibility. December 12: Unidentified Palestinians opened fire on a bus in the West Bank, seriously wounding the driver. December 13: PIJ claimed responsibility for a suicide terrorist attack in Gaza in which an individual drove a booby-trapped ambulance into an IDF jeep. The ambulance driver was killed and one Israeli soldier was wounded. December 14: A border policeman was slightly injured in an exchange of gunfire in Gaza. One of the attackers was killed. No one has claimed responsibility. December 15: A Palestinian with an ax attacked an Israeli soldier in the West Bank. IDF troops shot and killed the attacker. The soldier was unharmed. The perpetrator's affiliation, if any, is unknown. December 16: Two IDF targets in Gaza were attacked with explosives. No one was hurt or killed. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack. December 22: Two Israeli civilians were shot and killed in a drive by shooting of their vehicle near Ramallah. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack. December 23: An Israeli security guard was killed in the occupied territories. HAMAS claimed responsibility. December 24: Four Palestinian gunmen opened fire on an IDF jeep, wounding three and killing an officer. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack. One witness claimed the attackers shouted the name of HAMAS. December 25: Three Israeli soldiers were wounded by a remotely-detonated explosive device near Hebron. No one has claimed responsibility. December 29: Unidentified Palestinians attacked two Israeli sanitation workers near Hebron. One of the two workers was stabbed and is in serious condition. December 29: Three terrorists, probably belonging to the Abu Musa group, infiltrated northern Israel from Lebanon. No Israelis were hurt or killed; IDF troops killed the three infiltrators. December 31: A man claiming to be from the Fatah Hawks claimed responsibility for the murder of two Israeli civilians. However, Fatah officials in Gaza reportedly denied that they had issued any orders for this action and indicated that any Fatah activist involved was acting on his own. PLO statements on commitments Since September 13, Arafat has stressed that the PLO will adhere to UNSCR 242 and 338 in ``all their aspects'' and has actively worked to secure support for the agreement. Some of his statements have acknowledged the provision of the DOP ``guaranteeing security for all.'' Arafat publicly reiterated the PLO's renunciation of violence and terrorism on September 20. There have been a number of public statements, by both Israeli and PLO officials, that support the PLO's compliance with the commitments it undertook in September 1993. Following is a chronological list of some examples: September 20: In a statement to the official PLO news agency WAFA, Arafat publicly reiterated his opposition to violence. He called for ``the rejection of violence and terror'' and said that ``the establishment of a lasting, comprehensive and just peace is the essential goal which we all seek to accomplish.'' September 27: Arafat ordered PLO members in refugee camps in Lebanon to turn over their arms to the Lebanese Army. September 29: In a meeting with Israeli MAPAM party chairman Erez, Arafat reiterated his adherence to the implementation of all clauses of the DOP. He specifically emphasized his call to end all acts of violence against Arabs and Jews in the occupied territories and in Israel. October 24: Fatah issued a leaflet calling for an end to the torture and execution of suspected collaborators in the occupied territories and Gaza. October 25: Senior PLO official Nabil Sha'ath condemned the killing of two IDF soldiers in the Gaza Strip, as well as all other acts of violence and called for people in the West Bank and Gaza to refrain from violence. November 12: Faisal Husseini denounced the Fatah Hawks members responsible for the death of Israeli settler Haim Mizrahi. Husseini told journalists the five had violated the PLO's orders and that the PLO would take measures against anyone who violated these orders. November 13: Arafat condemned the Fatah Hawks attack on Mizrahi, saying ``we renounce and condemn the killing of Israeli settler Mizrahi.'' Arafat said the attach was carried out by an individual linked to the PLO who acted without the orders of the leadership. He called on all parties to ``put an end to all acts of violence for the preservation of peace.'' December 13: The Unified National Leadership of the Uprising (UNLU), which has provided leadership to the uprising known as the ``intifada,'' issued a leaflet expressing support for the peace process and calling on the Palestinians to be patient. The UNLU is not a PLO constituent group, although it is dominated by Fatah. These statements, Chairman Arafat's letter recognizing Israel's right to exist, and the PLO's continuing efforts to implement the DOP indicate the PLO is repudiating its ``strategy of stages.'' In late November, the Fatah Hawks street gang unilaterally declared they would continue the armed struggle in response to Israeli security forces' operations against their members. Fatah officials have denied that they ordered the December 31 acts, and we have no other evidence that the Hawks have engaged in any attacks on Israeli military forces or civilians since issuing this statement. In late December, the Fatah Hawks issued a further statement calling for the intifada to be kept at ``high levels'' and urging confrontation with settlers. Arafat has not responded publicly to either statement or to the December 31 claim. We have no evidence that suggests Arafat or the PLO headquarters in Tunis had any involvement with the Fatah Hawks' issuance of such statements or the claimed act nor that Arafat is directing such a policy. Arafat's ability to exercise control over groups like the Fatah Hawks, which are basically street gangs that are loosely affiliated with the PLO, is uncertain. On several occasion, senior Israeli officials have made statements indicating that the Israeli Government believes the PLO is upholding its commitments. Prime Minister Rabin and Foreign Minister Peres have both made public distinctions between the PLO, which is upholding the commitments, and rejectionist elements which seek to undermine the DOP. Other issues Other issues not related to the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles have not been central to our discussion with the PLO, and certain issues have become less significant since the date of the enactment of the PLO Commitments Compliance Act. For example, while the U.S. request for the extradition of Muhammad Rashid was denied by the Government of Greece, it did, with U.S. assistance, convict Rashid of the 1982 bombing of a Pan Am jet in which one person was killed. Rashid is currently incarcerated there. We also note that there is no current extradition request for Muhammad Zaydan (Abu Abbas) because there are no pending criminal charges against him. The Hawari Group is largely defunct due to the death of its leader and PLO funding cuts. With the exception of a 1992 weapons charge in Vienna against a Hawari group member, we have no information of Hawari Group involvement in terrorist activity since 1990. Arafat has provided only limited funding to Force 17, and has transferred some members to other components. According to recent reports, Force 17 may be reconstituted to serve in VIP protection, but would continue to be subject to the orders against participation in violent or terrorist acts. The PLO has not yet made any statements of its position on providing compensation to the American victims or the families of American victims of PLO terrorism. With respect to the Arab League Boycott of Israel, we continue to urge the PLO to come out publicly against the boycott and to bring the boycott to an end. It should be noted that in their ongoing talks, Israel and the PLO have been discussing the economic interaction between them, and these talks may promote the eventual elimination of the boycott. On negotiations with other Arab countries, the PLO is directly negotiating with Israel in the context of both direct talks between Israel and Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria, and multilateral discussions which involve most other regional states. PLO Covenant Only the 500-member Palestine National Council (PNC) can amend the Palestinian National Covenant. In his September 9 letter to Prime Minister Rabin, Arafat committed the PLO to ``undertake to submit to the Palestinian National Council for formal approval the necessary changes in regard to the Palestinian Covenant.'' Thus far, Arafat has successively obtained approval for the DOP from the Fatah Central Committee, the PLO Executive Committee, and the Palestinian Central Council (PCC). Conclusion We believe that the PLO is complying with the commitments embodied in the Declaration of Principles and in the letters to Prime Minister Rabin and Foreign Minister Holst. Rejectionist elements who claim to be under the PLO umbrella continue to commit terrorist acts. At the same time, both the U.S. and the Israeli Government recognize that Arafat has no real ability to exert operational control over these groups. In the single case in which we can confirm that members of an active PLO group were involved in an act of violence, the PLO leadership denounced the attack and reiterated that such attacks should cease. There is no information indicating the PLO leadership either directed or had knowledge of the incident before it occurred. U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, January 24, 1994. Hon. Warren Christopher, Department of State, Washington, DC. Dear Secretary Christopher: We have read the State Department's recent report to Congress pursuant to the PLO Commitments Compliance Act and wish to comment on it. While we appreciate the report's comprehensive nature and agree that the PLO has substantially complied with its commitments, we are concerned that a few critical points the report reads more like a defense of the PLO's lapses than a constructively critical guide to better behavior. In his September 9, 1993 letters to Israeli Prime Minister Rabin and Norwegian Foreign Minister Holst, PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat committed to: recognize Israel's right to exist, renounce terrorism and violence, accept UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, assure compliance of all PLO elements and personnel, call for an end to the ``intifada'', and submit amendments to the PLO Covenant to remove provisions inconsistent with Israel's right to exist. Taken together, these commitments implied the transformation of the PLO from a terrorist organization committed to Israel's destruction to a political organization representing Palestinians committed to living side by side with Israel. We recognize that such major transformations do not happen overnight. We are concerned, however, that the State Department report glosses over and too easily excuses the occasions when the PLO may be unwilling or incapable of completing such a transformation. The report states that, ``Rejectionist elements who claim to be under the PLO umbrella continue to commit terrorist acts. At the same time, both the U.S. and the Israeli governments recognize that Arafat has no real ability to exert operational control over these groups.'' In his September 9 letter, however, Arafat committed to ``assume responsibility over all PLO elements'' in order to ``assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators.'' By citing without comment Arafat's lack of control over rejectionist elements of the PLO the report implies that Arafat can escape responsibility for terrorism by simply claiming lack of control. If, in fact, Arafat cannot control the ``Fatah Hawks'' who are still within the PLO, let alone Hamas which is clearly outside the PLO, that does not relieve him of the responsibility to condemn their continuing terrorist acts. As President Clinton stated, ``leaders who seek peace must speak out in a loud and clear voice against those who would destroy those aspirations for peace.'' Instead, with the exception of one statement after the murder of the Israeli settler Haim Mizrahi by the Fatah Hawks, we have not heard a word from the PLO leadership condemning the terrorism of Hamas and rejectionist elements of the PLO. Regarding the ``strategy of stages'' whereby the PLO had declared its intent to create a Palestinian state as a first step to eliminating Israel entirely, the report states that Arafat's letters and the Israel/PLO agreement that the PLO is repudiating'' such a strategy. The report, however, does not question Arafat's refusal to take the most concrete act of repudiation of the ``strategy of stages''--fulfilling his commitment to seek amendment of the PLO Convenant by the Palestine National Council. Nor does the report mention symbolic remnants of the refusal to recognize Israel, such as the letterhead used by the PLO's Permanent Observer Mission to the United Nations which continues to depict ``Palestine'' as including the entirety of Israel. What does it say about the PLO's commitment to peace if the Palestine National Council cannot bring itself to endorse Israel's right to exist? The State Department report, rather than accepting these lapses, should frankly describe areas where the United States is seeking the PLO's full compliance with its commitments. We recognize the high level of Administration commitment to achieving this end. This report, however, accepts the PLO's failures without comment and thereby seems to excuse them rather than establishing any benchmark by which to measure progress. This undermines the U.S. effort to improve compliance by implying that no progress is necessary. Notwithstanding some of the timid language in this report, we assume that the United States remains committed to the PLO's full compliance with its commitments, including amending the PLO convenant, and that we will hold the PLO and its leadership to President Clinton's appropriate standard of ``a loud and clear voice'' against violence. We would appreciate your reassurance in this regard. Again, we appreciate the effort behind this report and look forward to receiving improved reports in the future. Sincerely, Connie Mack, U.S. Senate. Joseph I. Lieberman, U.S. Senate.
 
The speaker is LIEBERMAN and he says  Madam President, I join my distinguished colleague Senator Mack in offering this amendment to the State Department authorization bill in order to modify an important piece of legislation which Senator Mack and I offered in 1989 and saw enacted as the PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989. With the historic events of September 1993 when Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization signed the declaration of principles, the search for a lasting peace in the Middle East entered a new and hope-filled stage. But the road to peace in that troubled region has been a long and rocky one and while we hope that peace will at last become a reality, we must continue to be realistic about the possibility of problems developing along the way. Senator Mack and I believed, as did the Secretary of State, that the resumption of a dialogue with the PLO was appropriate and in the interests of peace and, thus, the reporting requirements of the PLO Commitments Compliance Act were once again relevant. We have recently received the first report by the Secretary of State since the resumption of the dialogue. It was apparent to Senator Mack and I that in light of the commitments made by PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat as part of the peace process, the PLO Commitments Compliance Act merited revision to update its provisions and to take into account the provisions of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act. This amendment which we offer today brings the PLO Commitments Compliance Act into harmony with the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act in both the timing of the reports and the commitments by the PLO which the administration must report on. We believe the amendment will enable the Secretary of State to make best use of his resources in preparing the reports required to be transmitted to us and will give the Congress a fuller explanation of the manner in which the PLO has complied with the important commitments it has made on the road to peace. President, I am hopeful that the events of September 1993 will be marked by future generations as the beginning of the end of violence, animosity, and war in the Middle East. But at the same time, I remain cautious and alert to the possibility that commitments which have been made might not be lived up to. It is critical that the Secretary of State stay attuned to this possibility and keep the Congress fully informed. The amendment which Senator Mack and I offer today will ensure that this is done. AMENDMENT No. 1294 SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE. This act may be cited as the ``Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994''. SEC. 2. FINDINGS. The Congress finds that-- (1) the Palestine Liberation Organization has recognized the State of Israel's right to exit in peace and security and to amend its covenant to recognize that fact; accepted United Nations Security Council resolutions 242 and 338; committed itself to the peace process and peaceful coexistence with Israel, free from violence and all other acts which endanger peace and stability; and assumed responsibility over all Palestine Liberation Organization elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations, and discipline violators; (2) Israel has recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization as the representative of the Palestinian people; (3) Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed a Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on September 13, 1993, at the White House; (4) The United States has resumed a bilateral dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization; and (5) In order to implement the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements and facilitate the Middle East peace process, the President has requested flexibility to suspend certain provisions of law pertaining to the Palestine Liberation Organization. SEC. 3. AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND CERTAIN PROVISIONS. (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), beginning July 1, 1994, the President may suspend for a period of not more than 180 days any provision of law specified in subsection (c). The President may continue the suspension for a period or periods of not more than 180 days if, before each such period, the President satisfies the requirements of subsection (b). Any suspension shall cease to be effective after 180 days, or at such earlier date as the President may specify. (b) Conditions.-- (1) Consultation.--Prior to each exercise of the authority provided in subsection (a), the President shall consult with the relevant congressional committees. The President may not exercise that authority until 30 days after a written policy justification is submitted to the relevant Congressional Committees. (2) Presidential Certification.--The President may exercise the authority provided in subsection (a) only if the President certifies to the relevant congressional committees each time he exercises such authority that-- (A) it is in the national interest of the United States to exercise such authority; and (B) the Palestine Liberation Organization continues to abide in good faith by all the commitments described in paragraph (4). (3) Requirement for Continuing PLO Compliance.--Any suspension under subsection (a) of a provision of law specified in subsection (c) shall cease to be effective if the President certifies to the relevant congressional committees, or if the Congress determines by Joint Resolution, that the Palestine Liberation Organization has not continued to abide in good faith by all the commitments described in paragraph (4). (A) Any joint resolution under this subsection shall be considered in the Senate in accordance with the provisions of section 601(b) of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976. (B) For the purpose of expediting the consideration and enactment of joint resolutions under this subsection, a motion to proceed to the consideration of any such joint resolution after it has been reported by the appropriate committee shall be treated as highly privileged in the House of Representatives. (4) PLO Commitments Described.--The commitments referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are the commitments made by the Palestine Liberation Organization-- (A) in it letter of September 9, 1993, to the Prime Minister of Israel; in its letter of September 9, 1993, to the Foreign Minister of Norway to-- (i) recognize the right of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security; (ii) accept United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338; (iii) renounce the use of terrorism and other acts of violence; (iv) assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators; (v) call upon the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to take part in the steps leading to the normalization of life, rejecting violence and terrorism, and contributing to peace and stability; and (iv) submit to the Palestine National Council for formal approval the necessary changes to the Palestinian Covenant regarding recognizing Israel's right to exist in peace and security, and (B) in, and resulting from the implementation of, the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements signed on September 13, 1993. (c) Provisions That May Be Suspended.--The provisions that may be suspended under the authority of subsection (a) are the following: (1) Section 307 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2227) as it applies with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization or entities associated with it. (2) Section 114 of the Department of State Authorization Act, Fiscal years 1984 and 1985 (22 U.S.C. 287e note) as it applies with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization or entities associated with it. (3) Section 1003 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal years 1988 and 1989 (22 U.S.C. 5202). (4) Section 37 of the Bretton Woods Agreement Act (22 U.S.C. 286w) as it applies to the granting to the Palestine Liberation Organization of observer status or other official status at any meeting sponsored by or associated with the International Monetary Fund. As used in this paragraph, the term ``other official status'' does not include membership in the International Monetary Fund. (d) Relevant Congressional Committees Defined.--As used in this section, the term ``relevant congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
 
The speaker is PELL and he says  Madam President, this amendment will allow the President to continue to waive legislative restrictions against the PLO. Under the terms of the amendment, the President's authority to waive such restrictions can be renewed indefinitely for 6 month periods. The net effect of the amendment is to facilitate the Middle East peace process by allowing the PLO to open an office in Washington, and by enabling the provision of assistance to Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. The amendment builds upon legislation introduced by Senator Helms and myself last year, which was passed by the Congress and signed into law. This amendment is the product of a great deal of bipartisan cooperation, and it has the full support of the State Department. I would note for the record that the amendment preserves the prerogatives of the Congress on this issue. Like the legislation passed last year, the amendment does not erase any restrictions against the PLO; it only gives the President authority to waive. The amendment also contains strict requirements for the President to consult and notify Congress about any use or renewal of the waiver authority.
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  Madam President, this amendment puts the President's right to waive certain provisions regarding the PLO into permanent law. The State Department assures us these changes are necessary for the peace process to move ahead smoothly. Senator Pell and I have agreed to submit this amendment, and I believe my colleagues on the other side are prepared to accept it. I have only one final note: I do not like the PLO, and I don't trust them. I pray that the PLO will use any new privileges responsibly and that the President will relax U.S. policy on the PLO gradually and very carefully. AMENDMENT NO. 1295 On page 25, between lines 10 and 11 insert: (4) No fee or surcharge authorized under subsection (a)(1) may be charged to a national of a country that is a signatory to the North American Free-Trade Agreement.
 
The speaker is DOMENICI and he says  Madam President, the State Department authorization bill includes a provision, requested by the administration, that would provide authority to the Department of State to charge a fee or surcharge for processing machine-readable nonimmigrant visas, border- crossing identification cards, and regular nonimmigrant visas. The Department intends to exercise this authority, if provided, by imposing a $20 application fee for machine readable nonimmigrant visas. While this fee will not fall on American citizens, it will have an impact on those who cross our borders as either tourists or businessmen. Therefore, it could have a negative impact on efforts to open our borders to more trade and commerce. In addition, the United States recently imposed two increases to user fees that affect cross-border traffic; the Customs user fee was increased from $5 to $6.50, and the INS international airline fee was increased from $5 to $6. Now, the income from both these fees goes to support worthy programs; indeed, the income from the visa fee will support improved border security and monitoring of aliens who enter the United States. However, most worthy programs are supported through general tax revenues. To the extent these programs are worthy, perhaps they should compete with other programs of Government that are not susceptible to user fees. Perhaps the biggest concern I have is the possible impact on the North American Free-Trade Agreement. The very concept of NAFTA implies that we will make commercial and business interchange between Canada, Mexico, and the United States easier and less expensive. That is why tariffs are being reduced. The imposition of a new user fee is contrary to that spirit. In addition, and perhaps most importantly, in practice this fee would apply to Mexican citizens and not Canadian citizens. Under NAFTA we should be treating both countries on an equal basis. While I am willing to accept the administration's proposal for a new fee program, I believe the signatories to NAFTA should be treated on an equal basis and that both Canada and Mexico should be exempt from this fee. Therefore, I am offering an amendment which would make this change, which the State Department has indicated is acceptable. I urge the managers and the Senate to accept it. amendment no. 1296 (Purpose: To amend the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1993, to impose sanctions on certain transfers of equipment and technology used in the manufacture or delivery of weapons of mass destruction and to impose additional sanctions for violations of that Act) At the appropriate place in the bill, insert the following new title: IRAN-IRAQ ARMS NON-PROLIFERATION AMENDMENTS OF 1994 SEC. 01. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCES IN ACT. (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Iran- Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Amendments of 1994.'' (b) Reference in Title.--Except as specifically provided in this title, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to or repeal of a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993. SEC. 02. STATEMENT OF POLICY. It is the policy of the United States to halt the proliferation of advanced conventional weapons within Iran and Iraq. SEC. 03. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this title to impose additional sanctions against those foreign countries and persons that transfer destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons, or goods and technology that assist in enhancing the capabilities of Iran and Iraq to manufacture and deliver such weapons. SEC. 04. SANCTIONS AGAINST PERSONS. Section 1604 is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Prohibition.--If the President determines that any person has transferred or retransferred goods or technology so as to contribute knowingly and materially to the efforts by Iran or Iraq (or any agency or instrumentality of either such country) to acquire destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons, then-- ``(1) the sanctions described in subsection (b) shall be imposed; and ``(2) the President may apply, in the discretion of the President, the sanctions described in subsection (c). ``(b) Mandatory Sanctions.--The sanctions to be imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) are as follows: ``(1) Procurement sanction.--Except as provided in subsection (d), the United States Government shall not procure directly or indirectly, or enter into any contract for the procurement of, any goods or services from the sanctioned person. ``(2) Export sanction.--The United States Government shall not issue any license for any export by or to the sanctioned person. ``(c) Discretionary Sanctions.--The sanctions referred to in subsection (a)(2) are as follows: ``(1) Transiting united states territory.-- (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law (other than a treaty or other international agreement), no employee or official of a sanctioned person and no good or technology that is manufactured, produced, sold, or shipped by the sanctioned person may transit by vessel or aircraft any territory subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. The Secretary of Transportation may promulgate regulations, as necessary, to provide for the implementation of this sanction in the most effective manner. (B) The Secretary of Transportation may provide for such exceptions from this paragraph as the Secretary considers in the interest of the United States. ``(2) Financial institutions.--(A) The President may by order prohibit any depositary institution that is chartered by, or that has its principal place of business within, a State or the United States from making any loan or providing any credit to the sanctioned person, except for loans or credits for the purpose of purchasing food or other agricultural commodities. ``(B) As used in this paragraph, the term `depository institution' means a bank or savings association, as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. ``(3) Use of authorities of the international emergency economic powers act.--The President may exercise the authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to prohibit any transaction involving any property in which the sanctioned person has any interest whatsoever except for transactions involving the provision of humanitarian assistance. ``(4) Prohbition on vessels that enter ports of sanctioned countries to engage in trade.-- ``(A) In General.--Beginning on the 10th day after a sanction is imposed under this Act against a country, a vessel which enters a port or place in the sanctioned country to engage in the trade of goods or services may not if the President so requires within 180 days after departure from such port or place in the sanctioned country, load or unload any freight at any place in the United States. ``(B) Definitions.--As used in this paragraph, the term `vessel' includes every description of water craft or other contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation in water, but does not include aircraft. ``(d) Exceptions.--The sanction described in subsection (b)(1) shall not apply-- ``(1) in the case of procurement of defense articles or defense services-- ``(A) under existing contracts or subcontracts, including the exercise of options for production quantities to satisfy operational military requirements essential to the national security of the United States; ``(B) if the President determines that the person or other entity to which the sanctions would otherwise be applied is a sole source supplier of the defense articles or services, that the defense articles or services are essential, and that alternative sources are not readily or reasonably available; or ``(C) if the President determines that such articles or services are essential to the national security under defense coproduction agreements; ``(2) to products or services provided under contracts entered into before the date on which the President makes a determination under subsection (a), ``(3) in the case of contracts entered into before the date on which the President makes a determination under subsection (a), with respect to-- ``(A) spare parts which are essential to United States products or production; or ``(B) component parts, but not finished products essential to United States products or production; or ``(C) routine servicing and maintenance of products, to the extent that alternatives sources are not readily or reasonably available; ``(4) to information and technology essential to United States products or production; or ``(5) to medical or other humanitarian items. ``(e) Consultation With and Actions by Foreign Government of Jurisdiction.-- ``(1) Consultations.--Whenever the President makes a determination under subsection (a) with respect to a foreign person, the Congress urges the President-- ``(A) to initiate consultations immediately with the government with primary jurisdiction over that foreign person with respect to the imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section; and, as appropriate, ``(B) to take steps in the United Nations and other multilateral groups to negotiate comprehensive multilateral sanctions pursuant to the provisions of chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter, including a partial or complete embargo, against the government of the foreign country of primary jurisdiction over that sanctioned person, as long as that government has not taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the sanctioned person or firm in the activities described in section 1604(a). ``(2) Actions by Government of Jurisdiction.--In order to pursue such consultations with the government, the President may delay imposition of sanctions pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) for up to 90 days. Following these consultations, the President shall impose sanctions immediately unless the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government has taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the foreign person in the activities described in subsection (a). The President may delay the imposition of sanctions for up to an additional 90 days if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government is in the process of taking the actions described in the preceding sentence. ``(3) Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days after the application of sanctions under this section, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the status of consultations with the appropriate government under this subsection, and the basis for any determination under paragraph (2) of this subsection that such government has taken specific corrective action.'' SEC. 05. SANCTIONS AGAINST CERTAIN FOREIGN COUNTRIES. Section 1605 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``sanction'' and inserting ``sanctions''; (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking ``sanction.--The sanction referred to in subsection (a)(2) is'' and inserting ``sanctions.--The sanctions referred to in subsection (a)(2) are''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(3) Denial of most-favored-nation status.-- Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the President may suspend the application of nondiscriminatory trade agreement (most-favored-nation status) to the sanctioned country for such time as the President so determines. ``(4) Diplomatic relations.--The President is urged to downgrade or suspend diplomatic relations between the United States and the government of the sanctioned country. ``(5) Suspension of special trade privileges.--The President is authorized to suspend special trade privileges which were extended pursuant to the Generalized Systems of Preferences or the Caribbean Basin Initiative. ``(6) Suspension of trade agreements.--The President is authorized to suspend any trade agreement with the sanctioned country. ``(7) Revocations of licenses for export of nuclear material.--The Nuclear Regulatory Commission is authorized to revoke any license for the export of nuclear material pursuant to a nuclear cooperation agreement with the sanctioned country. ``(8) Presidential action regarding aviation.-- (A)(i) The President is authorized to notify the government of a sanctioned country of his intention to suspend the authority of foreign air carriers owned or controlled by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States. ``(ii) The President is authorized to direct the Secretary of Transportation to suspend at the earliest possible date the authority of any foreign air carrier owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by that government to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States, notwithstanding any agreement relating to air services. ``(B)(i) The President may direct the Secretary of State to terminate any air service agreement between the United States and a sanctioned country in accordance with the provisions of that agreement. ``(ii) Upon termination of an agreement under this subparagraph, the Secretary of Transportation is authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to revoke at the earliest possible date the right of any foreign air carrier owned, or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States. ``(C) The President may direct the Secretary of Transportation to provide for such exceptions from this subsection as the President considers necessary to provide for emergencies in which the safety of an aircraft or its crew or passengers is threatened. ``(D) For purposes of this paragraph, the terms `aircraft', `air carrier', `air transportation', and `foreign air carrier' have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. 1301). ``(9) Other sanctions.--The President may apply the sanctions described in section 1605(c) with respect to actions of a foreign government.'' SEC. 06. WAIVER. Section 1606 is amended-- (1) ``by striking ``waiver'' each place it appears and inserting ``modification, and waiver''; and (2) by striking ``waive'' each place it appears and inserting ``modify or waive''. SEC. 07. TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1606 the following new section: ``SEC. 1606A. TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS. ``Except as otherwise provided in this title, the sanctions imposed pursuant to the Act shall apply for a period of at least 24 months following the imposition of sanctions and shall cease to apply thereafter only if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that-- ``(1) reliable information indicates that the government of jurisdiction has taken specific and effective action, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the sanctioned person in the sanctionable activity. ``(2) The President has received reliable assurances from the sanctioned government that such government will not, in the future, violate this Act.'' SEC. 08. STAY OF SANCTIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1607 the following new section: (a) Criterion for Stay.--The President may stay the imposition of any sanction on any entity in order to protect-- (1) ongoing criminal investigations, or (2) sensitive intelligence sources and methods which are being used to acquire further information on the proliferation of advanced conventional weapons, weapons of mass destruction, or missiles that would be comprised by the publication of the sanctioned entity's name. (a) Determination.--The President shall exercise the authority described in paragraph (1) only when the President determines that the non-proliferation goals of the Act are better served by delaying the imposition of sanctions rather than by compromising the criminal investigation or intelligence sources and methods at issue. (c) Lifting of Stay.--The President shall lift any stay imposed pursuant to this subsection as soon as the basis for the determination made pursuant to paragraph (2) no longer exists. (d) Notification and Report to Congress.--Whenever the duration of any stay imposed pursuant to this subsection exceeds 120 days, the President shall promptly report to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives the rationale and circumstances that led the President to exercise the stay authority. SEC. 09. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1607 the following new section: ``SEC. 1607A. RULES AND REGULATIONS. ``The President is authorized to prescribe such rules and regulations as the President may require to carry out this Act.'' SEC. 10. DEFINITIONS. Section 1608 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) The terms `goods and technology' includes any item of the type that is listed on the Nuclear Referral List under section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978, the United States Munitions List (established in section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act), or the MTCR Annex (as defined in section 74(4) of the Arms Export Control Act) or any item that is subject to licensing by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. ``(9) The term `United States' includes territories and possessions of the United States and the customs waters of the United States, as defined in section 401 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1401).
 
The speaker is McCAIN and he says  Madam President, I rise today to propose with my colleague from Connecticut, Senator Lieberman, the Iran-Iraq Arms Non- Proliferation Amendments of 1994 as an amendment to S. 1281, the State Department authorization bill for fiscal years 1994 and 1995. This legislation has the support of the administration and the Foreign Relations Committee and is similar to a bill introduced last year by Senator Lieberman and myself, which was cosponsored by Senators Bumpers, Campbell, D'Amato, and Hutchison. I would like to express my appreciation to Senator Lieberman and his staff, to the staff of the National Security Council, and to the members and staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for their assistance in crafting this final version of the legislation. With this amendment, we hope to continue in a bipartisan effort to reduce one of the greatest threats to world peace today--the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and advanced conventional weaponry to Iraq and Iran. Purpose of the Amendment Madam President, both Iraq and Iran have reemerged as continuing threats to the peace and stability of the Middle East, and thus pose a threat to the stability of the post-cold-war world. The amendment offered by Senator Lieberman and myself is intended to halt these nations' efforts to build or acquire destabilizing advanced conventional weapons. Our amendment would fill a gap in existing nonproliferation statutes by providing for sanctions against third parties who assist Iran or Iraq in their ongoing efforts to build or acquire these weapons. This amendment builds on legislation which I cosponsored in 1992 with then-Senator Gore and which was subsequently enacted into law as part of the Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1993. That law provides for sanctions which may be imposed against United States and foreign persons, as well as foreign countries, that provide such assistance to Iran and Iraq in acquiring weapons of mass destruction or destabilizing advanced conventional weapons. That law also authorizes sanctions which may be imposed against Iran or Iraq for their own actions. However, due to their limited scope, current sanction provisions have proven less than effective in deterring third-party violators, whether foreign countries or persons. Our amendment recognizes that sanctions focused primarily on United States individuals and firms do not affect the principal suppliers of weapons to Iran or Iraq. It is these third- party violations which present the most urgent threat to world stability by making available to Iran and Iraq both technology and the weapons of mass destruction, means of their delivery, and destabilizing advanced conventional weapons. This amendment would give the President the authority to impose additional discretionary sanctions when violators are identified using typical intelligence methods. The legislation is intended to allow the President the maximum leeway practical in determining the appropriate sanctions. The amendment is slightly different from the original bill we introduced last year. It does not include a section from the original bill which provided for import sanctions against persons found in violation of the law. We have removed this section on the advice of the staff of the Foreign Relations Committee because import sanctions constitute a form of revenue and such measures must originate in the House of Representatives. Let me be clear, however, that import sanctions would greatly enhance the effectiveness of this legislation. Should this bill be returned by the conferees with the import sanctions which were included in our original bill, I fully expect the Senate would support its adoption. We must use every measure to fight the transfer of weapons and military technology to Iran and Iraq. International arms control agreements and regimes are vital, but they often lack effective enforcement mechanisms; some, like the Biological Weapons Convention, have no teeth at all. Other nations will be far more likely to support and comply with arms control regimes if they know that a failure to do so could cost them access to U.S. technology, aid, and markets. Strong penalties that affect primarily United States businesses ignore the fact that most sales to Iran and Iraq come from foreign sources. Thus, U.S.-only sanctions penalize American firms without solving the problem. In fact, in my view, they help foreign competition. It is critical and essential to give our President the authority to sanction all violators with sufficient severity to compel compliance with the regime. It is critical and essential to sanction those foreign entities who would act to help Iran and Iraq acquire menacing, destabilizing weapons or technology. The Threat from Iraq and Iran As I have said, both Iraq and Iran are nations that will continue to pose a threat to peace and stability in the Middle East and the post- cold war world. In the past, Iraq has used poison gas against defenseless Kurdish civilians, invaded Iran and Kuwait, and launched missile attacks on cities in Israel and Saudi Arabia. Just last year, Iraq blew up relief convoys to the Kurds, used its army against the Shiites, supported terrorist attacks, carried out terrorist operations in Turkey, continued to block U.N. efforts to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, and arrested innocent civilians along the Kuwaiti border as spies. Iraq even attempted to assassinate President Bush. Iraq never had significant supplies of United States weapons or technology, but received well over $100 billion of advanced conventional arms and $27 billion of technology and supplies for weapons of mass destruction from other nations during the Iran-Iraq war and in the period just before the Persian Gulf war. Many of these later transfers came from Europe, and most came from nations that have signed or ratified international arms control agreements. Iraq has finally agreed to long-term monitoring of its arms potential, which will require intricate monitoring of some 100 critical sites in the country and over 1,000 industrial establishments capable of producing components for weapons of mass destruction, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency. This massive and expensive monitoring effort is required because of Iraq's continued efforts to rebuild its offensive military capabilities. Iran is also a threat to its neighbors and to regional security. In the past, it has encouraged terrorism and has seized islands in the gulf. Iran continues to steadily expand its military capabilities, including acquiring several submarines to patrol the waters of the gulf, and is aggressively seeking advanced weapons and related technology. Unlike Iraq, whose efforts to acquire arms were stymied by their defeat in the gulf war, Iran has had access to continuing supplies of arms, technology, and supplies for weapons of mass destruction. Since 1988, some 65 percent of all Iran's arms have come from Russia; 16 percent have come from China; 8 percent from Europe; and 10 percent from other nations. Iran has received 6.7 billion dollars' worth of arms since 1988 and well over 1 billion dollars' worth of technology and supplies for weapons of mass destruction. key elements Let me briefly summarize the four key elements of our amendment. First, our amendment clearly sets forth United States policy toward destabilizing arms sales to Iran and Iraq, and reinforces the importance of rigorously enforcing existing laws, such as the Arms Export Control Act. Second, our amendment would put needed additional pressure on the foreign suppliers to these countries, who have provided most of the advanced weapons and technology to Iran and Iraq. Third, our amendment builds on existing law that prohibits the transfer of equipment or technology that would contribute to the efforts by Iran or Iraq to acquire destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons. Fourth and most important, our amendment would strengthen existing sanctions for violators and provide the President with the flexibility to impose new discretionary sanctions, which would act to deter potential violators by confronting them with clear legal and economic penalties if they persist in aiding the military buildup in Iran and Iraq. mandatory sanctions in current law The existing Iran-Iraq nonproliferation legislation provides for the following sanctions: Against persons--United States or foreign: Prohibition on receiving U.S. Government contracts; and prohibition on receiving United States export licenses. Against foreign countries: Suspension of United States and multilateral development bank assistance; and suspension of codevelopment, coproduction, and military and dual-use technical exchange agreements. These mandatory sanctions apply to all offenders, although the President may waive them in the event of urgent national security needs. discretionary sanctions Current law provides for the discretionary use of authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to block international financial transactions of United States or foreign persons or foreign governments that assist Iran or Iraq in their weapons acquisition efforts. The McCain-Lieberman amendment provides for the following new discretionary sanctions: Against persons and countries.--United States or foreign: Prohibition against assistance from financial institutions; and suspension of U.S. aviation and port rights, and a prohibition on transiting U.S. territory. Against foreign countries: Denial of most-favored-nation status; suspension of diplomatic relations, special trade privileges, and trade agreements; and revocations of licenses for nuclear material exports. These sanctions would serve as a deterrent to potential violators of the law and would allow the President to tailor his actions and impose those sanctions that would be most effective in a particular situation. encouraging multilateral cooperation Our amendment does not mandate action by the United States when foreign governments are willing to take real and decisive action on their own. The legislation offers traditional incentives for foreign governments to join in international arms control efforts and to pass and enforce national legislation that parallels the nonproliferation legislation adopted by the United States. Our bill is not intended as a substitute for other efforts to control arms transfers and proliferation. We believe that every effort should be made to reach international and regional agreements and to persuade foreign governments to establish sanctions on the actions of their own companies and citizens. At the same time, we acknowledge that certain nations present a special threat to their neighbors, our allies, and American strategic interests. Iran and Iraq are two such nations, and our bill reinforces the seriousness we attach to the threat posed by Iran and Iraq. urgency Madam President, we must enact the Iran-Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Amendments soon. We must heed the lessons of Desert Storm and stop the weapons buildup by Iran and Iraq. We cannot make an ally or a pillar out of either country. A look at the Washington Post of January 23, 1994, makes clear the danger of harboring any illusions about the prospects for real change in Iraq. An article in that Sunday newspaper raises once again the specter of Iraq's aggressive efforts to rebuild its chemical weapons program. If true, this is another example of Iraq's duplicitous behavior and its refusal to accept international norms prohibiting the use or manufacture of chemical weapons. In this instance, our amendment would permit the President to impose sanctions not only against Iraq, but against the companies or countries that financed, produced, packed, or shipped this dangerous material. These extensive sanctions are not available under current law. In summary, the proposed amendments complement existing legislation in the fiscal year 1993 Defense Authorization Act and other U.S. and international arms control efforts. Together with rigorous enforcement of existing law, this amendment would improve the stability and security of the gulf region. It will help protect key friends and allies elsewhere in the Middle East, like Israel and Egypt. Senator Lieberman and I urge our colleagues to continue to support a bipartisan effort to reduce the greatest potential threat to peace in the world today, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and advanced conventional weapons in Iran and Iraq. I urge the adoption of our amendment.
 
The speaker is LIEBERMAN and he says  Madam President, I am pleased to join my distinguished colleague, Senator McCain, in sponsoring this amendment, which addresses a serious proliferation threat: The transfer of advanced conventional weaponry to Iran and Iraq. Senator McCain has already described the purpose and principal elements of our amendment, so I will not reiterate them here. I do, however, want to emphasize the urgency of the proliferation threat we face and the need to address it. Iran is engaged in an across-the-board buildup of its military. Despite falling oil prices, Iran continues to spend money on its armed forces, purchasing weapon systems which will strengthen its ability to block shipping through the Strait of Hormuz. In addition to acquiring attack submarines from Russia, Iran has recently purchased improved mines which can be used against passing ships, and is currently negotiating the purchase of advanced antiship missiles. Iraq is attempting to reestablish its weapons arsenal, while at the same time obstructing United Nations efforts to ensure compliance with resolutions aimed at restricting that arsenal. Unless we take decisive action now to deal with these two states, we may, by our passivity, ensure the success of their endeavors. Given the adverse effect such success would have on regional and, indeed, on international stability, this amendment is designed to discourage foreign persons and countries from providing Iran and Iraq with advanced conventional weapons or with technology and equipment that would enhance their advanced weapons capabilities. While U.S. law generally offers adequate sanctions against abuses by U.S. entities, smiliar measures are needed for foreign entities. Such measures could prove effective because Iran and Iraq rely on foreign suppliers for both weapons and technical assistance. Under this amendment, sanctions can now be applied against these suppliers. It is our hope that the sanctions which Senator McCain has outlined for you will provide strong disincentive to would-be proliferators. I want to emphasize this amendment builds upon legislation we agreed upon in the fiscal year 1993 National Defense Authorization Act. This act mandated certain sanctions against persons and foreign countries that contribute goods or technology to help Iran or Iraq acquire advanced conventional weapons. Our amendment revises and extends the provisions of the act principally by giving the President additional, discretionary authority to apply a wide range of sanctions against proliferators. I believe such authority is fully consistent with the purpose and direction of the existing legislation. Madam President, the provisions of this amendment will enhance the U.S.'s ability to counter the spread of destabilizing weaponry in two particularly dangerous states. These provisions should serve as a deterrent to current and potential violators and should slow, or hopefully even prevent, Iran and Iraq from achieving their military ambitions. I strongly urge my colleagues to join Senator McCain and me in supporting this amendment. amendment no. 1297 At the appropriate place in the bill insert: SEC. . REIMBURSEMENT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. Section 208 of title 3, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Out of funds otherwise available for fiscal year 1994 and fiscal year 1995 for ``Protection of Foreign Missions and Officials,'' the Secretary of State is authorized to reimburse the City of Seattle and State of Washington up to a total of $440,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $500,000 for fiscal year 1995 for unexpected extraordinary security costs associated with the change in the level of the participation in the Asian Pacific Cooperation conference held in Seattle in November 1993 from Ministerial to Heads-of-State. amendment no. 1298 (Purpose: To require a report on the activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran) On page , between lines and , insert the following: Sec. . (a) Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran receives material, logistic, and financial support from the Iraq Government. (2) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran has been involved in terrorist activities since the inception of the organization in 1963. (3) During the past 30 years, terrorist activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran have resulted in the deaths of more than 10,000 Iranians. (4) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran is responsible for the deaths of several United States military advisers in 1972 and 1973, for the deaths of two Air Force officers in 1975, and the deaths of three United States employees of the Rockwell International Corporation in 1976. (5) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran actively and vigorously supported the seizure of the United States Embassy in Tehran, Iran, in 1979. (6) The Department of State informally recognizes the involvement of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran in international terrorist activities and has refused contact with representatives of the organization. (7) The annual report of the Secretary of State on terrorist activities does not provide adequate information on the terrorist activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. (8) The past activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran, and the current policy of the Department of State with respect to the organization, create a presumption that the organization is currently engaged in international terrorist activities. (b) Except as provided in subsection (d), the annual report of the Secretary of State that is submitted to Congress on April 30, 1994, under section 140 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989 (Public Law 100-204; 22 U.S.C. 2656f) shall include information referred to in subsection (c) on the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. (c) The report referred to in subsection (b) shall include-- (1) an assessment of the activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of such section 140; and (2) any other relevant information on the People's Mujaheddin of Iran referred to in subsection (a)(2) of such section 140, including a detailed discussion of each of the matters referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (D) of subsection (b)(2) of such section. (d) The Secretary may elect not to include the information referred to in subsection (c) in the report referred to in subsection (b). In the event of such an election, the Secretary shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a justification for such election. (e) In the event of an election under subsection (d), not less than sixty days from the submittal of the report referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary shall submit an unclassified report to Congress detailing the structure current activities, external support and history of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. Such report shall include any connection to organizations operating in the United States. (f) In this section, the term ``People's Mujaheddin of Iran'' means the organization also know as the Mujaheddin-e Khalq that is based in Iraq and led by Iranian expatriates Massoud Rajavi or Maryam Rajavi and includes any group or organization associated with such organization, including the Iraqi-based National Liberation Army and the National Council of Resistance of Iran. amendment no. 1299 (Purpose: To impose notification and waiting requirements regarding certain events involving the Missile Technology Control Regime) On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. 714. NOTIFICATION OF CONGRESS ON CERTAIN EVENT INVOLVING THE MTCR. (a) Export in Support of Space Launch Vehicle (SLV) Programs.--At least 30 days before the export of any item controlled pursuant to United States obligations under the Missile Technology Control Regime and intended to support the design, development, or production of a Category I system, as defined in the MTCR Annex, to be utilized for the launch of satellites into space, the President shall transmit to Congress a report describing the proposed export and the rationale for approving such export, including the consistency of such export with United States missile nonproliferation policy. The President may waive the 30-day waiting period in any case in which the President certifies in the report that the national security interests of the United States necessitate immediate approval of the export or that the export represents the continuation of a long- standing relationship with an MTCR partner. (b) United States Position Regarding Admission of New MTCR Members.--At least 30 days before the United States takes the position to favor the admission of a particular country into the Missile Technology Control Regime, the President shall transmit to Congress a report describing the rationale for such position together with all relevant information concerning that country's nonproliferation policies, practices,and commitments. The President may waive the 30-day waiting period in any case in which the President certifies in the report that the national security interests of the United States necessitate immediate approval of the new member. (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the terms ``Missile Technology Control Regime'' and ``MTCR'' mean the policy statement, between the United States, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Canada, and Japan, announced on April 16, 1987, to restrict sensitive missile-relevant transfers based on the MTCR Annex, and any amendments thereto; and (2) the term ``MTCR Annex'' means the Guidelines and Equipment and Technology Annex of the MTCR, and any amendments thereto. amendment no. 1300 (Purpose: To retain the statutory charter of the Office of Foreign Missions to assist with diplomatic reciprocity and counterintelligence functions) On page 43, beginning on line 22, strike section 138 of the bill. On page 3, strike from the table of contents of the bill the item relating to section 138.
 
The speaker is DeCONCINI and he says  Madam President, the purpose of this amendment is simple. It would preserve in law the existing status of the Office of Foreign Missions [OFM] within the Department of State. That office was created in 1982 by the Department of State Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1982 and 1983--Public Law 97-241. At the time Congress was concerned that foreign diplomats in the United States were enjoying benefits denied to U.S. diplomats abroad. The Office of Foreign Missions, by controlling the privileges of foreign diplomats in the United States, gives us the means to improve the treatment of U.S. diplomatic personnel abroad. Congress also sought to ensure that the OFM assisted the Federal Bureau of Investigation in its counterintelligence mission. The cold war may have ended, but nothing has happened to alter OFM's charter. Indeed, it plays as important a role today as when it was created in 1982. Section 138 of the bill would, in the interests of streamlining and consolidating functions under the Secretary of State, abolish the statutory mandate for the OFM, leaving its continued existence a matter of discretion for future Secretaries. Senator Warner and I believe this is undesirable, inevitably weakening the status of the office. Also, by mandating the existence of the office in law the State Department is relieved of the burden of explaining and justifying to other governments why their diplomats in the United States must be regulated. The Department ought to appreciate having a congressional enactment to rely on in this regard. In short, we believe that the statutory provisions relating to OFM should remain intact. That is all our amendment would do. Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the letter dated August 3, 1993, which Senator Warner and I sent to the Committee on Foreign Relations concerning this amendment be printed in the Record. President, I understand that this amendment is agreeable to the floor managers on both sides and thus I hope that it can be accepted by voice vote. There being no objection, the letter was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: U.S. Senate, Select Committee on Intelligence, Washington, DC, August 3, 1993. Hon. Claiborne Pell, Chairman, Hon. Jesse Helms, Ranking Republican, Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Gentlemen: Section 138 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (S. 1281) would abolish the statutory mandate for the Office of Foreign Missions (OFM). In our judgment, the establishment and operation of the OFM is vital to the effective conduct of U.S. diplomatic and counterintelligence affairs. We fear that both would suffer if OFM's statutory charter is repealed. We respectfully urge, therefore, that appropriate action be taken to remove Section 138 from the bill. In 1982, Congress created the OFM in the Department of State Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1982 and 1983 (Public Law 97-241). Congress was concerned that foreign diplomats in the U.S. enjoyed benefits denied to U.S. diplomats abroad. The OFM, by controlling the privileges of foreign diplomats in the U.S., gave the U.S. the means to improve the treatment of U.S. personnel abroad. Congress also sought to ensure that the OFM assisted the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in the performance of its counterintelligence mission. Repeal of OFM's charter would likely impair the provision of this crucial support to the FBI. It was not clear to us from your Committee's report why the change in the OFM statute was recommended. If, as it appears, the motivation was simply to give the Secretary of State additional organizational flexibility, we urge you to reconsider the matter. In our view, the existence of OFM is of vital importance and should not depend upon the decision of an executive branch official. We would note also that mandating the existence of the office by law relieves the Department of State of the burden of explaining and justifying its existence to foreign countries which undoubtedly would prefer that their diplomats not be regulated. We appreciate the opportunity to present our views on this matter and we look forward to working with you on it. Sincerely, Dennis DeConcini, Chairman. John W. Warner, Vice Chairman. amendment no. 1301 (Purpose: To encourage the assignment of Foreign Service officers with advanced proficiency in foreign languages) On page 65, after line 12, insert the following new section: SEC. 155. ASSIGNMENT OF FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICERS WITH ADVANCED PROFICIENCY IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. (a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to encourage the assignment of Foreign Service personnel with language proficiency at the S4/R4 level (full professional proficiency, as tested by the Foreign Service Institute) to posts or positions in which their language capabilities are effectively utilized. (b) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Department of State's Office of the Inspector General noted, in its July 1993 report, that existing foreign language proficiency among members of the Foreign Service is not adequately weighed in the assignments process, and that existing skills are not adequately utilized, and (2) the Department of State's Office of the Inspector General urged that the Department has legitimate requirements at overseas posts that can only be satisfied through S4/R4 level skills, and recommended that certain overseas positions be designated at the S4/R4 competency level. (c) Program.--(1) Pursuant to section 702 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4022), the Secretary of State shall direct the establishment and apportionment of a certain number of overseas positions, at the S4/R4 level, in each of a majority of overseas missions, as follows: (A) For missions using world languages with more than 13 Foreign Service Officer positions assigned by the Department of State, 8 percent of positions and not less than one position will be established at the S4/R4 level. (B) For posts using hard or incentive languages, with more than nine Foreign Service Officer positions assigned by the Department of State, the number of S4/R4-designated positions shall be at least 4 percent of positions, and not less than one position. (2) Overseas posts and the Department of State shall retain flexibility to apportion S4/R4 language-designated positions within respective overseas posts. (3) Assignment of personnel with full professional proficiency shall be completed not later than September 30, 1995. (d) Report to the Congress.--The Secretary of State shall report to the Congress not later than September 30, 1994, describing the progress made toward implementation of this section.
 
The speaker is SIMON and he says  Madam President, we have the world's only Foreign Service with no language entry requirement, so it is particularly important that we encourage proficiency in languages among Foreign Service officers. I've put forward several measures in the authorization bill, and others in past years, with the object of raising language proficiency in the Foreign Service. I now offer another amendment, modestly designed to stimulate the assignment to our overseas posts of Foreign Service officers who speak and read the local language well. S4/R4--speaking:four/reading:four--is the score given to Foreign Service officers with so-called full professional proficiency in a language. This means real fluency, the ability to appear at a public meeting or be interviewed on television. Getting and keeping an S4/R4 takes hard work and talent. In comparison, S5/R5 is the score for an educated native-language speaker. Last year I consulted with numerous ambassadorial nominees, Foreign Service officers, who stressed the importance of having at least some staffers in their Embassies with full professional proficiency. But we have never, so far, accepted full professional proficiency as a requirement for any job in any of our Embassies overseas. The highest current requirement for any job is minimum professional proficiency, which is defined as able to speak the language with sufficient structural accuracy and vocabulary to participate effectively in most formal and informal conversations on practical, social, and professional topics. In other words, able to make yourself understood, sort of, most of the time. This isn't good enough. My amendment mandates the State Department to assign Foreign Service officers with full professional proficiency to 8 percent of the Foreign Service officer positions in each significantly sized mission, with not less than one position per mission. We have many fine linguists in our Foreign Service. Often, we aren't using their talents as we should. Full professional proficiency is what we should increasingly expect of our Embassies overseas, and 8 percent seems to me a modest beginning. I hope you agree. amendment no. 1302 (Purpose: To state the sense of the Senate on encouraging the peace process in Northern Ireland) On page 179, below line 6, add the following new section: SEC. 714. SENSE OF SENATE ON THE PEACE PROCESS IN NORTHERN IRELAND. (a) Findings.--The Senate makes the following findings: (1) The people of Northern Ireland, Ireland, and Great Britain earnestly seek a peaceful end to a conflict in the North of Ireland which has caused more than 3,000 deaths since 1969. (2) The people of the United States, many of whom share a common ancestry and cultural roots with the people of Northern Ireland, Ireland, and Great Britain, are deeply concerned about the continuing conflict and desire to facilitate an early resolution to the conflict. (3) In 1993, John Hume, head of the Social Democratic and Labour Party and Gerry Adams, President of Sinn Fein, conducted talks on the conflict. (4) These talks were a significant contribution to a climate encouraging peace in the North of Ireland. (5) The Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of Ireland have held talks on Northern Ireland culminating in the Joint Declaration issued by the two governments on December 15, which declaration offers a framework for lasting peace in the region. (b) Sense of Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that the United States should strongly encourage all parties to the conflict in the North of Ireland to renounce violence and to participate in the current search for peace in the region.
 
The speaker is WOFFORD and he says  Madam President, I think we all agree that one of the most persistent and tragic troublespots in the world is Northern Ireland. Recently, there have been encouraging signs that at least some of the parties to the dispute there may be prepared to forgo violence and turn toward peaceful dialog in an effort to bring the troubles to an end. Many of us were encouraged when John Hume, head of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, and Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, revealed that after months of meetings the two sides had apparently conducted serious discussions aimed at bringing peace to Northern Ireland. In the wake of the Hume-Adams initiative, the Irish and British Governments have also undertaken important talks. The Downing Street Joint Declaration which resulted is a new milestone in efforts to bring the troubles to an end. Many Americans, concerned about the troubles in Northern Ireland, are hopeful that this new effort will bear fruit. It is on this basis that I have offered this sense-of-the-Senate resolution encouraging the process. President, I yield the floor. amendment no. 1303 (Purpose: To make available funds for the recruitment of Hispanic Americans into the Foreign Service and other careers in international affairs) On page 9, between lines 4 and 5, insert the following: (4) Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for ``Salaries and Expenses'' under subsection (a)(2), $300,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 and 1995 is authorized to be available for the recruitment by the Department of State of Hispanic American students from United States institutions of higher education (as defined in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965) with a high percentage enrollment of Hispanic Americans for the purpose of training such individuals for careers in the Foreign Service and international affairs.
 
The speaker is BRADLEY and he says  Madam President, I have sent an amendment to the desk to authorize $300,000 from the State Department's salaries and expenses account for the recruitment and training of Hispanic-Americans in the Foreign Service. Our diplomats are America's face to the world. They are the people who live abroad and represent not only American interests, but America itself. For our diplomatic corps properly to represent the United States, it must mirror the diversity of American society. Indeed, one of our most effective diplomatic tools in this post-cold war environment is the power of America's example as a prosperous, democratic, multiethnic, multicultural democracy. One of the lessons of the recent Russian elections is that people must have a vision of how such a democracy can function. Our ability to project that vision by our example is undercut by the unrepresentative nature of our current Foreign Service. In addition, it is essential that all individuals, from all ethnic and gender groups, have equal opportunity to pursue a career in the diplomatic service. This is the flip side of the American example, living by our own principles. No one argues against the need for a representative diplomatic corps. Where we differ with the administration is in the criterion of success. The administration's criterion is process. It argues that it has programs in place to ensure that all gender and minority groups are represented in appropriate numbers. My criterion is stricter--results. And the results are sobering. The administration's programs are not working. Hispanic-Americans in particular are badly underrepresented in the Foreign Service. Let me cite a few statistics: Whereas Hispanic-Americans are America's fastest growing ethnic group and in 1990 made up 9 percent of the American population, they made up only 4.2 percent of Foreign Service Officers in fiscal year 1993. This figure is no improvement over 1992 in percentage terms, and a drop of three officers in absolute terms. It is also only a small increase over the 1985-91 average of 3.8 percent. At the senior executive level, there are only 10 Hispanic men, including 2 ambassadors, and no Hispanic women. There clearly is a need for better results. The House has recognized this problem by appropriating $500,000 per year in fiscal years 1994 and 1995 for recruiting and training Hispanic-Americans into our Foreign Service. My amendment aims at the same goal by authorizing $300,000 per year. In this way, my amendment will put the State Department on notice that Hispanic-Americans must have equal opportunity to represent their country--our country--in the Foreign Service. It will put the State Department on notice that the only acceptable criterion is results. amendment no. 1304 (Purpose: To require restoration of retired pay improperly withheld from any retired member of the uniformed services furnishing military service to a newly democratic nation) On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. 714. RESTORATION OF WITHHELD BENEFITS. (a) Eligibility.--With respect to any person for which the Secretary of State and the Secretary concerned within the Department of Defense has approved the employment or the holding of a position pursuant to the provisions of section 1058, title 10, United States Code, before the date of enactment of this Act, the consents, approvals and determinations under that section shall be deemed to be effective as of January 1, 1993. (b) Technical Correction.--Subsection (d) of section 1433 of Public Law 103-160 is repealed.
 
The speaker is McCAIN and he says  Madam President, last spring, the Department of Defense terminated the military retired pay of Col. Alexander Einseln, an American citizen and former active duty Army officer, for accepting the position of Commander in Chief of the Estonian Armed Forces. In the interest of assisting Colonel Einseln in his vital effort to reform the Estonian military, I took action on the 1994 Defense bill to gain approval for his employment with the Government of Estonia and restore his military retired pay. Colonel Einseln's service to the Government of Estonia was approved by both the Secretary of State and Secretary of the Army as required by Public Law 103-160. Notification was made to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service and Colonel Einseln has begun to receive his checks. Because of a drafting error in the legislation and a difference of legal opinion, however, the Department of Defense failed to make payment on the pay withheld from Colonel Einseln in the course of 1993. The intent of my amendment today is to require the Department of Defense to make payment on the portion of his retired pay withheld. It is my hope that the Department of Defense will act expeditiously to restore retroactively the pay that Colonel Einseln earned with more than 30 years of service to our Nation. amendment no. 1305 (Purpose: To extend the auto parts advisory committee to advise United States auto parts negotiators in trade negotiations with Japan, and for other purposes) On page 129, after line 6, add the following new section: SEC. . EXTENSION OF THE FAIR TRADE IN AUTO PARTS ACT OF 1988. (a) In General.--Section 2125 of the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act of 1988 (15 U.S.C. 4704) is amended by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``1998''. (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on December 30, 1993.
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  Madam President, I am offering an amendment, along with Senators Riegle and Wofford, to extend an important industry advisory group that advises the administration on auto parts issues. My amendment extends the Auto Parts Advisory Committee which advises the administration on auto parts trade negotiations. The Auto Parts Advisory Committee, known as APAC, is a national advisory committee established by the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act included in the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988. This committee, made up of members of the U.S. auto parts industry, advises the Department of Commerce on programs to increase sales of United States-made auto parts and accessories to Japanese automotive manufacturers world wide. APAC members are private sector representatives who devote their time and extensive expertise and receive no Government compensation for their membership on the committee. We are at a critical juncture in the ongoing United States auto parts negotiations with Japan, yet APAC authority has expired as of December 31, 1993. In recognition of APAC's significant contributions to the auto parts debate and the U.S. negotiating position, we must quickly extend their life. The Department of Commerce, the agency taking the lead on auto parts negotiations, has urged us to extend APAC authority because of the invaluable contributions APAC has made to the process. The Department of Commerce continues to need this industry input during the critical framework auto-parts negotiations with Japan. President Clinton has also urged us to act swiftly to extend APAC. In a letter he sent me on this topic President Clinton said of the Auto Parts Advisory Committee: During the past 5 years of its existence, the committee has provided, on a continuing basis, sound advice to the administration on the very complex issues involved in automotive trade with Japan. Beginning in the summer of 1992, the Department of Commerce initiated the process to reauthorize the committee for an additional 5 years . . . [we] will appreciate your efforts in ensuring the swift passage of this legislation. Let me reiterate that APAC's reauthorization is particularly time sensitive because of the need for the administration to continue to receive important industry guidance and support during the critical weeks of the United States-Japan economic framework negotiations. I ask unanimous consent that the President's letter be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the letter was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: The White House, Washington, January 6, 1994. Hon. Carl Levin, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Carl: Thank you for your thoughtful letter regarding the expiration of the Automotive Parts Advisory Committee to the Department of Commerce. During the past five years of its existence, the Committee has provided, on a continuing basis, sound advice to the Administration on the very complex issues involved in automotive trade with Japan. Beginning in the summer of 1992, the Department of Commerce initiated the process to reauthorize the Committee for an additional five years. Proposed legislation was sent to the Congress in October of last year but, unfortunately, it was not enacted before Congress adjourned. We intend to re-submit proposed legislation to Congress early in 1994, and will appreciate your efforts in ensuring the swift passage of this legislation. In the interim, I have instructed the Department of Commerce to seek temporary authorization for the Committee to meet so that the Administration may continue to receive important industry guidance and support during the approaching critical weeks of the U.S.-Japan Economic Framework negotiations. Thank you for your support of the Administration's efforts on behalf of the U.S. automotive industry. With best wishes, Sincerely, Bill Clinton.
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  Madam President, APAC has been an important catalyst in organizing a diverse auto parts industry that includes over 5,000 U.S.- owned companies, many of them small businesses, and directly employing over 700,000 people. This has led to a more unified industry able to make important contributions to the trade debate. APAC has also made significant contributions to the wealth of knowledge of our U.S. negotiations and bolstered the U.S. negotiating position on auto parts. APAC's contributions to the process in the 5 years since the enactment of the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act include American Government and industry conducted studies on the competitiveness of the United States auto parts industry and of the barriers to trade faced in selling to Japan. APAC has also issued a number of reports and recommendations to the Commerce Department on what steps must be taken to open Japan's markets to United States auto parts. Both the auto parts industry and the administration strongly support a swift extension of APAC so that it can continue to contribute to the ongoing United States-Japan auto parts negotiations. APAC's guidance and support to the administration bolsters our negotiating hand both in providing industry knowledge and presenting a united front to our negotiating partners. I commend the hardworking members of APAC for their dedicated service to the United States and hope that APAC will soon be extended so it can continue to provide these invaluable services for an additional 5 years.
 
The speaker is RIEGLE and he says  Madam President, I rise in support of the amendment offered by my colleague from Michigan, Senator Levin, to reauthorize the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act of 1988. I would also like to commend Senator Levin for his leadership on this issue and commend the efforts of the other members of Congressional Auto Parts caucus. This amendment will insure that the Automotive Parts Advisory Committee will continue its work. This is especially important as we reach a critical state in the United States-Japan economic framework negotiations. As many of my colleagues know, these negotiations are essentially stalled, with a critical deadline approaching. President Clinton and the Japanese Prime Minister Hosokawa are scheduled to meet February 11 to review progress on the United States-Japan framework negotiations-- including progress on negotiations to open the Japanese market and Japanese auto transplants in this country to U.S. autos and auto parts. Yet, Commerce Secretary Ron Brown is quoted as saying, ``We haven't had a lot of luck in negotiations thus far.'' Secretary Brown also said that the deficit with Japan could jump 20 percent this year to $60 billion. So far, the administration seems to be holding firm on the negotiations. Treasury Secretary Bensten, during his recent trip to Japan, said: We'd rather have no agreement than have a weak agreement or something that has a cosmetic result where we go home patting each other on the back. I believe it is important for the administration to continue to stand firm in all aspects of the negotiations--especially specific measurable targets and access to Japanese auto transplants. The auto parts deficit alone accounted roughly 20 percent of our total trade deficit with Japan. Thus, it is easy to understand the importance of the Automotive Parts Advisory Committee. I also believe that the administration must be prepared to take tough action if the negotiations fail. Last year, I introduced S. 1132, the Fair Trade in Motor Vehicle Parts of 1993, to extend the existing Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act for 5 years and strengthens our ability to deal with unfair trade practices in auto parts. In addition to reauthorizing the 1988 act, S. 1132 mandates section 301 actions against countries whose policies effectively limit U.S. motor vehicle parts manufacturers' access to their market. It also requires the USTR to undertake negotiations to eliminate trade barriers that limit the access to U.S. auto parts manufacturers and requires the Commerce Secretary to initiate an antidumping investigation for motor vehicle parts imports from countries with which the United States has a motor vehicle parts deficit of $5 billion or more in each of the preceding 3 years. The bill also attacks the well documented trade restricting aspects of the Japanese keiretsu system head on. If a country's distribution system restricts access to their market, that barrier would be considered an unfair trade practice. These are some of the actions I believe the administration should consider if the framework negotiations fail to resolve the problem of the trade imbalance in autos and auto parts between the United States and Japan. We in Congress can take a step toward the resolution of the trade imbalance by supporting the amendment by Senator Levin. I urge its adoption.
 
The speaker is WOFFORD and he says  Madam President, I am pleased to join my colleague from Michigan in introducing this legislation to extend the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act. Among other things, the act requires the Secretary of Commerce to establish an initiative to increase sales of United States-made auto parts and accessories to Japanese markets. In my State of Pennsylvania, 17,000 workers are employed in auto manufacturing related industries. And these workers consistently turn out a high-quality, competitively priced product. So, for these workers and their families, the current trade imbalance with Japan is unfair and unacceptable. During the last 8 years of auto parts negotiations, the United States auto parts deficit with Japan has grown from $3.3 billion in 1985 to nearly $11 billion in 1993. There's been a lot of talk, but no action from the Japanese. During the talks leading up to the President's visit to Japan next month, the United States needs to obtain definite commitments by Japanese auto manufacturers to increase the purchase of United States parts. And if we can't achieve a more balanced trade relationship this way, the United States should use the available laws to level the playing field. The legislation we are introducing today will help the United States Government keep its focus on improving the trade imbalance with the Japanese in the auto parts sector. It should also serve as signal to the Japanese Government and auto industry of our resolve to reverse that imbalance. amendment no. 1306 (Purpose: To require a report of the use of Haitian, Iraqi, Iranian frozen or blocked government assets or any other official government assets frozen or blocked by the United States) On page 179, after line 6, insert the following: SEC. 714. REPORT ON THE USE OF FOREIGN FROZEN OR BLOCKED ASSETS. Not later than 30 days after enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report containing a detailed accounting analysis and justification for all expenditures made from foreign governments' assets that have been frozen or blocked by the United States Government, including but not limited to those expenditures made from Haitian frozen or blocked assets by the Government of President Jean Bertrand Aristide, and those made from Iranian and Iraqi frozen or blocked assets. amendment no. 1307 On page 12, line 3, strike ``$14,200,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$16,000,000''.
 
The speaker is LUGAR and he says  Madam President, in accordance with President Clinton's budget request for fiscal year 1994, S. 1281 authorizes $14.2 million for fiscal year 1994 for the International Fisheries Commissions in section 103(4) of the bill. Because of the critical need for sea lamprey control, Congress appropriated $2 million for fiscal year 1994 above the President's budget request. This additional amount was designed to help the Great Lakes Fisheries Commission pay for the cost of registering the lampricide TFM with EPA. Because of this appropriation, the Great Lakes Fisheries Commission has announced that it will be able to continue its vital lamprey control program during fiscal year 1994. My amendment would increase the authorized amount for fiscal year 1994 for the International Fisheries Commission to $16.2 million in order to accommodate this increase in funds which have already been appropriated. Failure to authorize an additional $2 million for registration of the pesticide TFM would not be a cost effective strategy. Sea lamprey control is essential to maintaining Great Lakes fisheries. The economic value of the Great Lakes sport and commercial fisheries is estimated at $2 to $4 billion annually. I urge adoption of my amendment. amendment no. 1308 (Purpose: To promote sustainable development and the American Environmental Technology Industry) At the appropriate place in this Act insert the following: It is the sense of the Senate that the President has determined that sustainable development is one of the goals of United States foreign policy and therefore, the United States, in conducting bilateral and multilateral negotiations, should to the maximum extent feasible, take into consideration the principles of sustainable development that encourage broad based economic growth, protect the environment, build human capital and knowledge, and promote democratic participation and development. It is the further sense of the Senate that domestic producers of environmental goods and services should, to the maximum extent practicable, be notified of any potential business opportunities which result from United States bilateral and multilateral assistance programs and negotiations.
 
The speaker is BAUCUS and he says  Madam President, I rise to introduce an amendment to this bill to promote sustainable development as a goal of American foreign policy. This is a sense-of-the-Senate amendment, and I believe it has been cleared by both sides. The amendment notes that the President has declared sustainable development a goal of our foreign policy. Given that, it states that in our various international and bilateral negotiations and to the extent feasible, the United States shall take the principles of sustainable development into consideration. Sustainable development, of course, is an attempt to promote broad- based economic growth; but growth that promotes environmental protection; stabilizes world population growth; builds human capital and knowledge; and promotes democratic participation and development. It is a new approach, and President Clinton has made a top priority in foreign policy. I hope the Senate will back him up. Finally, and to take us from the visionary to the practical, the amendment also states the sense of the Senate that domestic producers of environmental goods and services shall be notified of the business opportunities which result from our negotiations. Once again, this amendment has the support of both sides, and the administration as well. I urge the Senate to adopt it. amendment no. 1309 On page 101, line 24, strike ``$2,000,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$1,000,000''. On page 102, line 12, strike ``$4,500,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$1,500,000''. amendment no. 1310 (Purpose: To provide for the coordination of refugee affairs programs through officials other than the United States Coordinator for Refugee Affairs) On page 42, strike out lines 5 through 11 and insert in lieu thereof the following: (a) Coordination of Refugee Affairs.--Section 301 of the Refugee Act of 1980 (8 U.S.C. 1525) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec. 301. (a) The Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall-- ``(1) develop overall United States refugee admission and resettlement policy; ``(2) coordinate all United States domestic and international refugee admission and resettlement programs in a manner that assures that policy objectives are met in a timely fashion; ``(3) develop an effective and responsive liaison between the Federal Government and voluntary organizations, Governors and mayors, and others involved in refugee relief and resettlement work to reflect overall United States Government policy; and ``(4) make recommendations to the President and to the Congress with respect to policies for, objectives of, and establishment of priorities for, Federal functions relating to refugee admission and resettlement in the United States. ``(b) In the conduct of the duties described in subsection (a), the Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall consult regularly with States, localities, and private nonprofit voluntary agencies concerning the sponsorship process and the intended distribution of refugees. ``(c) The Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall design an overall budget strategy to provide individual agencies with policy guidance on refugee matters in the preparation of their budget requests, and to provide the Office of Management and Budget with an overview of all refugee-related budget requests.''. (b) Amendments to the Refugee Act of 1980.--Title III of the Refugee Act of 1980 is amended-- (1) in the title heading, by striking ``UNITED STATES COORDINATOR FOR REFUGEE AFFAIRS'' and inserting ``UNITED STATES COORDINATION OF REFUGEE AFFAIRS''; and (2) in the heading of part A, by striking ``United States Coordinator for Refugee Affairs'' and inserting United States Coordination of Refugee Affairs''. On page 43, line 4, before the semicolon, insert ``and inserting `, together with the Secretary of State,'''.
 
The speaker is KENNEDY and he says  Madam President, I am offering today with my colleague on the Immigration Subcommittee, Senator Simpson, a modest amendment to ensure coordination between the various agencies of the executive branch in developing and implementing U.S. refugee policy. Section 137(a) of S. 1281 eliminates the Office of U.S. Coordinator for Refugee Affairs. The Coordinator's office was established in the Refugee Act of 1980 to ensure coordination between the Department of State, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of Justice in planning for refugee entry and resettlement in the United States. Although many fine people served in the Coordinator role since 1980, much of the Coordinator's independent authority eroded over time. Therefore, it is perhaps appropriate that Senator Pell's bill eliminates that office. The need for coordination between Federal agencies on refugee program issues has not abated, however. States and localities continue to be concerned about refugee resettlement on their communities, highlighting the importance of a coordinated and well- articulated resettlement policy among Federal agencies. The amendment thus does not change S. 1281's elimination of the U.S. Coordinator's office. Instead, it provides that the Department of State shall coordinate with the Department of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General on the development of overall refugee resettlement policy, accomplishment of refugee policy objectives, and liaison between the Federal Government and States and localities. It further requires these three agencies to work together in designing an overall budget strategy for refugee program matters. amendment no. 1311 At the appropriate place in the bill insert the following sections: Section 1. Section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, 8 U.S.C. 1255, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (c) of this section, an alien physically present in the United States who (A) entered the United States without inspection; or (B) is within one of the classes enumerated in subsection (c) of this section may apply to the Attorney General for the adjustment of his or her status to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. The Attorney General may accept such application only if the alien remits with such application a sum equalling five times the fee required for the processing of applications under this section as of the date of receipt of the application. The sum specified herein shall be in addition to the fee normally required for the processing of an application under this section. ``(2) Upon receipt of such an application and the sum hereby required, the Attorney General may adjust the status of the alien to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if (A) the alien is eligible to receive an immigrant visa and is admissible to the United States for permanent residence; and (B) an immigrant visa is immediately available to the alien at the time the application is filed. ``(3) Sums remitted to the Attorney General pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall be disposed of by the Attorney General as provided in sections 286 (m), (n), and (o) of this Title.'' Section 2. Section 212(a)(9) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, 8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(9), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(D) An alien applying for an immigrant visa who has been physically present in the United States within the ninety day period immediately preceding the date of such application is excludable.''
 
The speaker is KENNEDY and he says  Madam President, I am pleased to join my colleague on the Immigration Subcommittee, Senator Simpson, in offering this amendment to strengthen the capacity of our consular services overseas by changing a provision of current immigration law. According to both the Department of State and the Immigration and Naturalization Service about 30 percent of current immigrant visa applicants at consular posts abroad have been living in the United States prior to their application for an immigrant visa. Because they are prohibited by section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.) from adjusting their status to that of immigrant while they are in the United States, these individuals--including children--are required to leave the United States and secure a visa at a U.S. consular section so they may reenter as immigrants. Designed to dissuade visa overstays and others circumventing normal visa requirements, this provision of law has not provided the intended deterrent to illegal immigration and its effect as a penalty for violation of our immigration laws has been minimal. Further, it has become very costly and time-consuming for the Department of State's Consular Service to provide visa services for this group of individuals. In examining the Department of State authorization bill, we have found that certain of its provisions could adversely effect the Department of State's budgetary capacity to provide consular services for our citizens both here in the United States and abroad. These provisions, such as freezing the size of the Foreign Service, authorizing the collection of application fees for nonimmigrant visas, and instituting statutorily mandated sanctions for the erroneous issuance of a nonimmigrant visa, have worthy goals. Nevertheless, if they are instituted without consideration for funding or personnel shifts they will inevitably require, services to U.S. citizens will suffer. Our proposed amendment to the pending bill, is designed to reduce significantly the immigrant visa processing caseload at consular offices abroad. If adopted, these changes could eliminate at least 30 percent of the workload of the immigrant visa sections at our consulates. This could free as many as 40 officer positions and over 200 foreign service national positions to cover the new consular requirements. Additionally, by moving the immigrant visa processing now done overseas to the Immigration and Naturalization Service [INS] adjudication centers in the United States, we will generate funds to meet the costs of those services and provide INS resources to protect the integrity of the immigration process. INS has both the capacity and willingness to assume these responsibilities with the funds that will be made available to it through the additional fees mandated in our amendment. I urge the adoption of this amendment. amendment no. 1312 (Purpose: To include in the Secretary of State's annual country report on terrorism a description of terrorist assets held in the United States) On page 94, strike out lines 3 through 12 and insert in lieu thereof the following: (a) In General.--Section 140(a) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989 (22 U.S.C. 2656f(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively; (3) by inserting ``(1)'' immediately after ``Terrorism.-- ''; (4) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (5) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``; and''; and (6) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) the nature and extent of assets held in the United States on behalf of foreign countries and groups responsible for the acts described in subparagraphs (A) and (B). ``(2) In reporting on the information required by paragraph (1)(C), the Secretary of State shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, and such other heads of relevant departments and agencies of the United States as may be necessary.''. (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 140(b) of such Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(A)''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(B)''.
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  Madam President, the amendment before us will require the U.S. Government to compile an annual report on assets held by terrorist nations and groups in the United States. This amendment is similar to one that was adopted as part of the 1992 State Department reauthorization bill. And, I understand this amendment has been accepted on both sides. Under the 1992 amendment, the Treasury Department is required to compile and issue an annual report on these terrorist assets. Unfortunately, the Treasury Department, under both the Bush and Clinton administrations, has been derelict in its duty to carry out the law. After being nearly a year and a half late in issuing its first report, Treasury did finally issue one that was short on information and severely lacking in details. Despite the law's direction to compile information on both terrorist states and groups or organizations, Treasury chose to report only on country assets and ignored its responsibility regarding information on group assets. Disregarding its mandate, Treasury stated that it ``does not compile information on the holdings of private individuals or organizations in the United States unless those assets are subject to sanctions * * *.'' Because the Treasury Department appears to be unable to carry out this responsibility, the amendment before us will transfer the responsibility to the State Department as part of its already well- established annual terrorist report. The State Department will consult with Treasury and other relevent investigative agencies in order to prepare a detailed asset report. With the advent of terrorist attacks within the United States in the last year, the need for more information on terrorists has become imperative. Information on terrorist assets will help law enforcement, as well as victims of terrorism, to go after the money and property that funds terrorist activities. Without these assets, terrorists will not be able to function. One of the major purposes of the asset report is to help implement the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1992, which I sponsored. Under this law, we gave victims of terrorism the authority to sue terrorists for civil damages. A detailed asset report will help victims locate and satisfy any court-awarded damages. A detailed terrorist asset report is necessary if we are going to carry out a successful overall anti-terrorism strategy. I look forward to working with the State Department as it carries out this mandate. AMENDMENT No. 1313 At the appropriate place, add the following: ``SEC. . PASSPORT SECURITY. ``(a) It is the Sense of the Congress that the Department of State is strongly urged to assure that any new passport issuances should, to the maximum extent practicable: ``(1) be secure against counterfeiting, alteration, duplication or simulation; ``(2) be easily verifiable with appropriate inspection by public officials and private and commercial personnel; and, ``(3) contain only American-sourced materials and technology. ``(b) The Secretary of State shall provide a report to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and the House Committee on Foreign Affairs within 30 days of enactment detailing actions taken by the Department to accomplish the goals set forth in subsection (a).''. AMENDMENT NO. 1314 (Purpose: Regarding the safety of United States personnel in Sarajevo) On page 179, after line 6, add the following new section: SEC. . SAFETY OF UNITED STATES PERSONNEL IN SARAJEVO. (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the United States has recognized and established diplomatic relations with the Government of Bosnia- Hercegovina; (2) the United States Ambassador to Bosnia-Hercegovina does not have any secure permanent or semipermanent facilities to conduct United States diplomatic activities in Sarajevo; (3) the protracted conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina creates serious physical risks to United States diplomatic personnel serving there; (4) the United States Ambassador to Bosina-Hercegovina resides and carries out his duties from Vienna, Austria; and (5) an increased and more secure United States diplomatic presence in Sarajevo would enhance United States interests in Bosnia-Hercegovina. (b) Policy.--(1) It is, therefore, the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of State should immediately take steps to increase the presence of United States diplomatic personnel in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Hercegovina consistent with the objective of ensuring their physical safety. (2) Such steps should include secure facilities, communication capability, ground transportation and other capabilities, as appropriate, to enable United States diplomatic personnel to conduct regular official United States diplomatic activities in Sarajevo. (c) Report.--The Secretary of State shall report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on the steps taken to enhance the security and safety of United States diplomatic personnel not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 
The speaker is LUGAR and he says  Madam President, this amendment urges the Secretary of State to immediately take steps to improve the security and safety of our diplomatic personnel in and around Sarajevo, Bosnia and Hercegovina. The situation in Sarajevo, as it now stands, is dangerous for our Ambassador and his staff to function in any semblance of normality. He enjoys no secure permanent or semipermanent facility, no secure communication capability and very little security in ground transportation. This limits the time and the operations of our Ambassador and our diplomatic activities in Bosnia and Hercegovina. By definition, his ability to promote United States interests in Bosnia and Hercegovina is constrained. I am informed that the creation of secure diplomatic facilities in Sarajevo would not require any substantial increase in funding over and above that which is already being spent to protect him there. If our Ambassador and his diplomatic staff enjoyed improved security and safety by having secure facilities in Sarajevo, they would not only be safer, these personnel would be better able to promote and safeguard United States interests in that country. I urge the Members to support this amendment.
 
The speaker is DOLE and he says  Madam President, it is my understanding that this amendment has been cleared on both sides. This amendment is very simple. It is a sense-of-the-Senate that the Secretary of State should immediately take steps to increase the United States diplomatic presence in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, consistent with the objective of ensuring their physical safety--to include the provision of secure facilities, communication capability, ground transportation and other capabilities. At present, the United States Ambassador to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Victor Jackovich, carries out his duties from Vienna, Austria. But, when he travels to Sarajevo--which is increasingly rare, due to limitations placed on his travel by the State Department--he is without a facility from which to operate. Now we all know that Sarajevo is a dangerous place. But, in my view, we need to support our Foreign Service and diplomatic personnel wherever they may be because they have an important role to play. To date, the State Department has addressed the question of safety in Sarajevo by essentially not addressing it. The Department's answer to the security question is limiting Ambassador Jackovich's travel to Sarajevo--not trying to enhance his security while he is in this war zone. While the Ambassador can carry out some of his duties from Vienna, he is still the Ambassador to Bosnia and must have the ability to represent the United States in Sarajevo on a fairly regular basis. I believe that it is in the United States interest to have a presence in Sarajevo on a more regular basis consistent with reasonable security requirements. The United States recognizes and has established diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. While administration policy has been to push aside the issue of the war in Bosnia as much as possible, we cannot let our representation and presence in Bosnia suffer the same fate. Therefore, I hope that those responsible for this matter in the State Department will interpret this amendment as a big hint and move forward with providing the Ambassador immediately with armored vehicles, a reliable communications capability, and at the very least, a semipermanent facility for which he can operate in Sarajevo, and where he can take shelter if he gets stuck there during periods of intensified fighting. Let's not forget that the situation in Sarajevo is unpredictable; the Ambassador may intend to go in for a day, but find that the airport is closed only an hour later--we're not talking about the Washington-New York shuttle. I thank the managers for working with us on language that is acceptable to the Foreign Relations Committee.
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, if I may just clarify for the record, the Senator from North Carolina was absolutely correct that there are technical amendments in the group of en bloc amendments. But there are also amendments of substance that both sides have agreed on that are in these en bloc amendments. So I think, for the record, for anybody wondering, all of the amendments are amendments that have been cleared on both sides and that would have been passed by voice vote. Madam President, with respect to the bill we have been on up until now, the State authorization bill, there will be votes Tuesday beginning at 10 o'clock in the morning and we will be here to work on amendments as of 1 o'clock on Monday. So for those people who are on the list who have amendments that need to be disposed of before the deadline on Tuesday evening, we will be working Monday at 1 o'clock with votes to occur starting at 10 o'clock in the morning on Tuesday. Madam President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The absence of a quorum has been suggested. The clerk will call the roll. The assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered.
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent to speak as if in the morning business.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  Madam President, I wanted to bring my colleagues up to date on the status of an amicus brief that many of us will file in the case of United States versus Knox. On November 4, all 100 of us voted for a resolution that Senator Roth and I offered that expressed the sense of the Senate that the Government's Supreme Court brief in the Knox case failed to reflect congressional intent in enacting the Child Protection Act of 1984. Knox, a repeat offender under this statute, had purchased videos that portrayed young, scantily clad girls in provocative poses. In the resolution, we rejected the Government brief's newly found focus on the intent of the victim, rather than the pornographer's intent as reflected in the video. We also rejected the Government's requirement that the child be nude or that the pubic area be discernible. We rejected that brief because it is very clear that it was contrary to the intent of the 1984 act. And if it was not so clear, we would not have approved a reaffirmation of that 1984 statute by a vote of 100 to zero, in turn rejecting the Government's newfound interpretation of that 1984 statute. Following the unanimous vote on the resolution, Senator Heflin and I have coordinated the filing of an amicus brief in the third circuit, where the Knox case is now pending. The court has granted permission for Members of Congress to file such a brief, and has allowed additional interested Members to join the brief. Currently, more than 150 Members of Congress have agreed to appear on the brief, including 33 Senators. As evidence of the nonpolitical nature of the brief, the Members include Democrats and Republicans, liberals, moderates, and conservatives, northerners and southerners. All of these diverse Members agree that the Justice Department has flouted congressional intent. And they know that unless Members of Congress appear in the case and argue the original intent of the statute, then no one else will, since the Government decided to go a different direction in their interpretation of the law. Child pornography is a serious evil. The sexual exploitation of children that necessarily occurs in its production leaves lifelong scars on these young people. These potential victims deserve the protection of strong laws, and Congress has passed tough legislation against these practices. And we recognized that the harm to children does not exist only where the child herself intends to act lasciviously or is nude. I simply cannot understand why the Government has taken the same side as the child pornography offender in this case. And 150 other Members of Congress, both Republican and Democrat, agree. We have continued to add Members to our brief, as the court order granting us leave to appear in the case permits additional Members to be added until the brief is filed. Just within the last 2 days, two more Senators have had their names added. Pending procedural motions in the case mean that the brief will be filed soon, perhaps in only a few weeks. Nonetheless there is still time for additional colleagues to join the brief that reflects the position all of us took on November 4, on the sense-of-the-Senate resolution when 100 to zero, we reaffirmed the original 1984 interpretation of that statute. So I urge additional Senators to join the brief before the Third Circuit in Pennsylvania. And I urge them to do this to further the purpose of the original anti-child-pornography statute passed in 1984: Because we wanted to protect the children of America. ____________________
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  Madam President, I will address another point, something that I addressed over a long period of time--last year, at least--the breakdown of discipline and integrity in financial management within the Government. I suppose there are problems all the way through Government on this. But I have been spending most of my time speaking about the breakdown of such discipline and integrity in fiscal management specifically within the Defense Department. So, today, speaking further on that, and more specifically to what I feel is incorrect action the General Accounting Office has taken. I want to direct some criticism dealing with the Department of Defense but this time toward the Comptroller General, Charles Bowsher. I would have to say over a long period of time I have been very complimentary of things that Bowsher has done. He cooperated with me on a great number of things. He has been very helpful to the Congress as a whole in making sure that the taxpayers' dollars are well spent. But in this particular instance I have to disagree with what Bowsher has said. My concerns about Bowsher and GAO's decision flow directly from that decision to reopen the Department of Defense, or DOD, M accounts. I am fearful the GAO decision will further the breakdown of discipline and integrity in the fiscal management within our Government. And, of all Government officials, I think the Comptroller General should be in the forefront of enhancing fiscal management of Government. I feel until this decision I have not disagreed very often with Bowsher. I would like to divide my presentation on Bowsher's decision into two parts. Today, I would like to address the legal issues surrounding the decision. Then next week I would like to focus on one technical aspect of the decision that I find particularly offensive. To refresh your memory, Madam President, DOD had stashed $50 billion in expired appropriations in a slush fund known as the M accounts. This money had accumulated over three or four decades. This money had no fiscal year identify and was being used to cover cost overruns and other unauthorized activities beyond the purview of Congress. So Congress took steps in 1990 to close down the secret bank account. Congress passed a law that phased out the M accounts over a 3-year period. The last M account was closed on September 30, 1993. Early last year, I heard some Pentagon bureaucrats were planning a last-ditch raid on the M accounts. They were seeking approval from the Comptroller General to draw substantial sums of money from M accounts that had been closed by a 1990 law that we passed. The Army wanted to recover $130 million that it said was inadvertently canceled due to a clerical error. I would like to meet the clerk who misplaced the decimal point and accidentally canceled $130 million in Army budget authority. The DOD plan causes me concern, Madam President, and it still causes me concern because they can go ahead now under this GAO ruling. To begin with, why would DOD turn to the Comptroller General for relief from a law passed by Congress? I think there is an obvious answer. The bureaucrats in the Pentagon were hoping to use a legal gimmick to circumvent the law and make another end run around Congress. The Air Force had previously launched a similar probe, seeking relief from the M account law, but Congress threw cold water on that idea. DOD figured the General Accounting Office [GAO] was easier than Congress. And they are right about that. The Army's $130 million request was to be a test case--like the camel's nose under the tent. A green light from the Comptroller General on the $130 million could open the flood gates. The Air Force is waiting in the wings with a request for another $200 to $300 million of clerical error and maybe more. That is the word on the street. I do not know about the Navy. So on March 25, 1993, I wrote to Bowsher to inquire about how he intended to proceed with the DOD request to reopen the M accounts. The M accounts had been closed by act of Congress. It took 6 long months to get an answer. Then Bowsher did exactly what I was afraid he would do. He gave the Pentagon the green light to reenter the magic vault or M accounts. Madam President, I do not understand Bowsher's decision. He cites legal authority but none of it withstands scrutiny. Madam President, the main source of my concern is Bowsher's decision paper entitled ``Department of the Treasury Request for Opinion on Account Closing Provisions of the Fiscal Year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act.'' The report is identified, for anybody who wants to read it, by the number B-251287 and is dated September 29, 1993. Madam President, I ask unanimous consent to print my letter and the GAO documents in the Record. There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in theRecord, as follows: U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, March 25, 1993. Hon. Charles A. Bowsher, Comptroller General, U.S. Government Accounting Office, Washington, DC. Dear Bowsher: I am writing to raise questions about your review of the Department of the Treasury's request to exempt the Department of Defense (DOD) from certain provisions of the ``M'' account reform act of 1990--Sections 1045 and 1406 of Public Law 101-150. At DOD's request, the Treasury Department is seeking approval and authority to use ``administrative procedures'' to draw substantial sums of money--at least $130 million and probably much more--from ``M'' accounts that have been cancelled and closed by law. The Treasury Department has asked you to render an opinion on this matter, based on the authority vested in your office by 31 USC 1553 and 31 USC 3326. The request is contained in a letter dated October 27, 1992. Bowsher, I am somewhat baffled by the Treasury Department's request, since the department readily admits that there is no authority in the law to do what DOD wants done. The Treasury Department's letter clearly suggests that the ``plain language'' of the ``M'' account reform act leaves no room for ``administrative discretion'' to resolve DOD's money problem. The Treasury Department letter correctly points out that the balances involved have been cancelled, deobligated, withdrawn, and are no longer available. And, as Treasury points out, the law does contain a safety valve designed specifically to address the DOD's problem. If there are indeed legitimate obligations that are properly charged to accounts that have been closed under the current law, then Section 1405 (b)(7) provides for the use of current appropriations to meet those obligations. The Treasury Department concludes with this assessment: ``The law does not provide for the adjustment or restoration of amounts cancelled or withdrawn based on clerical mistakes or errors in reporting; nor does it provide for administrative correction, after the fact, of cancellations or withdrawals which resulted from clerical mistakes or errors in reporting * * *'' Bowsher, I think the Treasury Department's interpretation of the law is entirely correct. The intent of the law is crystal clear. There is no ambiguity in the law whatsoever. The accounts in question have been cancelled and closed. The balances in those accounts have been wiped off the books. They are gone. There is nothing in the law that would permit DOD or Treasury to re-open those accounts. And certainly, there is no authority in the law to establish ``a pass through account mechanism''--as proposed by Treasury-- that would allow for adjustments after accounts were closed due to sloppy bookkeeping procedures. Furthermore, if DOD had complied fully with the ``M'' account legislation and audited those accounts and determined which obligations were valid and supported by documentary evidence as required by 31 USC 1501, the Pentagon would not be in this fix today. Now, Bowsher, how does DOD find itself in this predicament? How could DOD erroneously cancel $130 million in valid, unliquidated obligations--due to a ``clerical error''? As you know so well, this is not the result of a ``clerical error.'' It is the result of sloppy bookkeeping--pure and simple. Disbursements and obligations are not being recorded in accounting books in a timely manner. The delay between the time an obligation is incurred and recorded can be measured in days. It can be months and even years. The process of recording obligations should be nothing more than a technical accounting function, but at the Pentagon, it has become highly politicized--and for good reason. The failure to record obligations in a timely way has become a way of avoiding and concealing Antideficiency Act violations. It is exactly this kind of problem that gave rise to the ``M'' account reform act. Slopping bookkeeping, overobligations, and Antideficiency Act violations seem to be a way of life at the Pentagon. In my mind, this is unacceptable and must not be tolerated. I would like to urge you not to authorize the Treasury to reopen ``M'' accounts that have been cancelled and closed by law. I would like to be informed of your final decision on this matter. Your consideration would be appreciated. Sincerely, Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senator. ____ Comptroller General of the United States, Washington, DC, September 29, 1993. Hon. Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senate. Dear Senator Grassley: This responds to your March 25, 1993 letter regarding a request of the Department of the Treasury for our opinion on the account closing rules in section 1405 of the fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act. Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1675 (1990). Specifically, Treasury asked whether it has the authority to restore canceled appropriation account balances in order to correct reporting and accounting errors. Enclosed is our decision of today, B-251287, which advises that Treasury may not restore canceled appropriation account balances. A narrow exception to this rule allows for restoration of canceled balances where an obvious clerical mistake has been made. The decision also concludes that Treasury may adjust canceled appropriation account balances in order to record a disbursement that was made prior to cancellation. The recordation of the disbursement is neither a new obligation of, nor an expenditure from, the canceled account, but is merely an accounting adjustment to reflect the liquidation of an obligation that was incurred prior to cancellation. We share your concerns about the bookkeeping practices of the Department of Defense, and recommend, in the decision, that the Secretary of the Treasury establish reasonable time limits for the correction of reporting errors resulting from obvious clerical mistakes and for the matching of disbursements with canceled obligations. We would be happy to meet with you or your staff to discuss this decision further. Amy Shimamura of our Office of the General Counsel can arrange such a meeting. Her telephone number is (202 512-5644. Sincerely yours, Milton J. Socolar, Acting Comptroller General of the United States. ____ Decision Matter of: Department of the Treasury Request for Opinion on Account Closing Provisions of the Fiscal Year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act. File: B-251287. Date: September 29, 1993. digest 1. Under the fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act, canceled merged appropriation account balances may not be restored. 31 U.S.C. Sec. 1551 note. However, if the Department of the Treasury is presented with convincing evidence that a reporting error has occurred as a result of an obvious clerical mistake, it may restore such balances to correct the mistake. We recommend that Treasury establish reasonable time limits within which agencies must submit requests for correction of errors. 2. Under the fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act, canceled appropriation account balances are not available for obligation or expenditure for any purpose. 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1552(a), 1555. The Department of the Treasury, however, may record a disbursement made before cancellation as a payment. Recording the disbursement is neither a new obligation of, nor an expenditure from, a canceled account, but is merely an accounting entry to reflect the liquidation of an obligation before cancellation. decision The Department of the Treasury (Treasury) requests our opinion on questions raised by the Department of Defense (DOD) regarding the account closing provisions of section 1405(b) of the fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act (Act), Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1675 (1990), codified at 31 U.S.C. Sec. 1551 note. Treasury asks two specific questions. First, Treasury asks whether it may restore either unobligated or obligated appropriation account balances that were canceled due to reporting errors or clerical mistakes. We conclude that Treasury may do so. Second, Treasury asks whether it may record as a payment from a canceled account a disbursement made prior to cancellation of the account. Treasury may do so. Since the liquidation of the obligation eliminates the budget authority, leaving nothing to be canceled, recording the disbursement is neither a new obligation of, nor an expenditure from, a closed account. It is merely an accounting entry to reflect the liquidation of an obligation validly incurred and liquidated prior to cancellation. background Treasury's question arise from two different situations. In the first situation, the Department of the Army (Army) submitted to Treasury a year-end statement (S.F. 2108) for fiscal year 1991, certifying its balances to be withdrawn and canceled. The Army advises that it mistakenly included approximately $130 million in valid, unliquidated obligations in its listing of unobligated merged surplus authority balances that were canceled under section 1405(b)(3) of the Act. This mistake involves Army procurement appropriations for fiscal years 1983, 1984, 1985, and 1986. The Army has asked the Treasury to restore the $130 million to its ``M'' account. The second situation involves delays in year-end reporting with respect to ``cross-disbursing'' transactions, that is, transactions where one DOD component makes payments for another. Many DOD disbursing officers make payments on obligations of other DOD components as well as of their own component. Inherent in this practice is a time delay between the date of payment and the date on which the activity holding the obligation receives notification of payment. The time delay is exacerbated when the disbursing activity makes an accounting error, for example, by charging the payment to the wrong appropriation account.\1\ These cross-disbursing payment issues take on added significance when payments are associated with ``M'' or expired account balances nearing cancellation dates. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Footnotes at end of article. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- DOD and Treasury note that if the disbursing activity fails to notify the activity holding the obligation in due course, the budget authority supporting the paid obligation may be canceled by operation of law, 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1551 note, 1552(a), leaving only current appropriations available to cover obligations and adjustments to obligations of canceled appropriation accounts. 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1551 note, 1553. Under prior law, obligated balances of an appropriation account, 2 years after expiration of the account for purposes of obligation, were merged with the obligations of like appropriation accounts from prior fiscal years into what came to be called merged or ``M'' accounts. 31 U.S.C. Sec. 1552 (1988), amended by section 1405(a) of National Defense Authorization Act for 1991, Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1675. Similarly, the unobligated balances of expired accounts were combined with the unobligated balances of like accounts for prior fiscal years in merged surplus authority accounts. Id. To the extent an agency needed additional authority to cover adjustments to obligations or previously unrecorded obligations in the ``M'' accounts, the agency could restore unobligated amounts from the merged surplus authority accounts to the ``M'' accounts. Id. The merged accounts were available to adjust obligations without fiscal year limitations. In 1990, Congress determined that the controls over the use of appropriations were not effective and that DOD, in particular, was expending funds from these accounts without sufficient assurance that authority for such expenditures existed or in ways that the Congress did not intend.\2\ To correct these defects, Congress enacted the account closing provisions in the fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Act.\3\ The Act eliminates merged accounts and extends an expired appropriation account's fiscal year identity to 5 years, after which time the account closes. 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1551 note, 1552(a). Section 1405(b)(3) of the Act canceled merged surplus authority accounts on December 5, 1990. Section 1405(b)(6) of the Act canceled, on March 6, 1991, merged obligated balances of budget authority that had been in ``M'' accounts more than 5 years. Under section 1405(b)(4), any remaining ``M'' account balances are to be canceled by September 30, 1993. discussion As a general rule, Treasury may not restore balances canceled under sections 1405(b)(3), 1405(b)(4), and 1405(b)(6). This proposition flows naturally from Congress's decision to ``cancel,'' that is, to nullify or invalidate, the unobligated balances in the merged surplus authority (section 1405(b)(3)) and the obligated balances in the ``M'' accounts (sections 1405(b) (4) and (6)). Although the operative language of section 1405(b)(6), entitled the ``Cancellation of oldest obligated balances,'' does not use the verb ``cancel'' to achieve the stated result, it achieves the same result by specifying that ``[a]mounts so deobligated and withdrawn may not be restored.'' Thus, the restoration of canceled unobligated balances would be inconsistent with the Act. This does not mean that Treasury cannot restore amounts so as to correct obvious reporting and clerical errors. We have long held, for example, that Treasury may transfer from the general fund to the correct appropriation account amounts improperly deposited into the general fund. See, e.g., 45 Comp. Gen. 724, 730 (1966); 3 Comp. Gen. 762 (1924); 2 Comp. Gen. 599, 601 (1923); 12 Comp. Dec. 733, 735-36 (1906). The Comptroller of the Treasury explained the rationale underlying this principle: ``Taking [the improperly deposited amount] from the Treasury and placing it to the credit in the Treasury of the appropriation to which it belongs violates neither the Constitution nor any other law, but simply corrects an error by which it was placed to the unappropriated surplus instead of to the appropriation to which it belongs.'' 12 Comp. Dec. at 735. We think the same principle applies here. In this sense, the Treasury adjustments of the accounting records does no more than place the funds back into the account where they otherwise belong. As the Supreme Court observed in a related situation, it ``would be unrealistic * * * to require congressional authorization before a data processor who misplaces a decimal can `undo' an inaccurate transfer of Treasury funds.'' Republic National Bank of Miami v. United States, ---- U.S. ----, 113 S. Ct. 554, 561 (1992). We wish to emphasize, however, that Treasury's authority to correct the accounts relates only to obvious clerical errors such as misplaced decimals, transposed digits, or transcribing errors that result in inadvertent cancellations of budget authority, and is not meant to serve as a palliative for deficiencies in DOD's accounting systems. The current record does not provide any indication of the type of mistake at issue here. Only if the Army is able to provide Treasury with convincing evidence that the mistake here falls within the coverage of the above decisions may Treasury adjust Army's accounting records to restore budget authority needed to correct the mistake. One of the very reasons for the new account closing procedures was the inadequacy of DOD's past accounting of ``M'' account obligations. See, e.g., H.R. Rep. No. 665, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 2962 (``not all claims against the M accounts are valid''). We have recently reported on a number of accounting problems in the Army and Air Force which indicate that DOD's accounting for current appropriations is also inadequate. For example, in a report examining the Army's financial statement for fiscal years 1992 and 1991, we were unable to express an opinion on the reliability of the financial statements for those fiscal years because of the Army's accounting systems inadequacies and failure to adhere to DOD and Army financial policies.\4\ In another report, we found that five Air Force Air Logistics Centers had inaccurate account balances totalling $512 million due to, among other things, paying a contractor too much, charging the wrong appropriation account, or processing information on obligation, payment, or collection transactions inaccurately or incompletely.\5\ In our view, the type of clerical errors that Treasury can correct should typically manifest themselves soon after an account is closed. The passage of time only magnifies the difficulty inherent in reconstructing the facts needed to establish the error. Therefore, we recommend that Treasury establish reasonable time limits within which agencies must submit requests for correction of reporting errors resulting from obvious clerical mistakes.\6\ Turning to the second question, Treasury may adjust canceled appropriation account balances to record disbursements made before cancellation of expires accounts. The restriction in section 1552(a) of title 31, United States Code, codifying section 1405(a)(1) of the Act, does not apply because recording the disbursement results in neither a new obligation of, nor an expenditure from, the canceled appropriation account. The liquidation of the obligation eliminates the underlying budget authority, leaving nothing to be canceled. It completes the transaction and discharges the government's liability. The recording of the disbursement made prior to cancellation of the expired account is simply an accounting entry to reflect the completion of the transaction before cancellation of the expired account. We see no reason why DOD and Treasury should not record these disbursements for canceled ``M'' account or expired account balances.\7\ Accordingly, if DOD is able to establish to the satisfaction of the Treasury that a validly recorded obligation in a canceled appropriation account was liquidated before cancellation, then Treasury may adjust the canceled appropriation account balance to reflect the disbursement. If a disbursement that was made before cancellation of an appropriation account cannot be matched with a recorded obligation of a canceled account, but DOD can establish to the satisfaction of Treasury that the disbursement represents payment of a valid unrecorded obligation otherwise properly chargeable against the canceled appropriation account, then Treasury may adjust the canceled account balance to reflect the disbursement. Of course, if there is insufficient budget authority available in the canceled account to cover the disbursement, DOD should determine whether there was a reportable violation of the Antideficiency Act, 31 U.S.C. Sec. 1341. We recommend that if the Secretary of Defense cannot match disbursements with obligations of canceled appropriation accounts within time limits established by Treasury,\8\ the Secretary determine the reason for DOD's inability to do so, and take appropriate action to correct the problem. footnotes \1\We have reported that the Navy's Standard Accounting and Reporting System which annually accounts for nearly $57 billion, or 57 percent, of the Navy's overall budget, contained $12.3 billion in unmatched disbursements as of February 19, 1992. In that report, we stated that unmatched disbursements were largely caused by lax compliance with existing guidance, procedural requirements, and internal controls. GAO Report to the Acting Secretary of the Navy, ``FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT--Navy Records Contain Billions in Unmatched Disbursements,'' GAO/AFMD-93-21 (June 1993). \2\GAO Report to Congressional Committees, ``FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT--Agencies' Actions to Eliminate ``M'' Accounts and Merged Surplus Authority,'' GAO/AFMD-93-7 (April 1993). \3\H.R. Rep. No. 665, 101st Cong., 2d Sess. 2962-63 (1990). \4\GAO Report to the Congress, ``FINANCIAL AUDIT--Examination of the Army's Financial Statements for Fiscal Years 1992 and 1991,'' GAO/AIMD-93-1 (June 1993). \5\GAO Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Defense, Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives, ``FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT--Air Force Records Contain $512 Million in Negative Unliquidated Obligations,'' GAO/AFMD-89- 78 (June 1989). \6\Pursuant to section 4230.60 of the Treasury Financial Manual (TFM), treasury requires the submission of year-end closing reports by deadlines specified in TFM Bulletins. \7\The alternative of using current appropriations, provided by sections 1405(a)(1) and 1405(b)(7) of the Act, 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1551 note, 1553(b)(1), would not be appropriate here because under those sections current appropriations are only available for obligations and adjustments to obligations that would have been chargeable to canceled balances. Obligations that were liquidated by disbursements made prior to cancellation are no longer obligations of the canceled account. The use of current appropriations to liquidate paid obligations would result in a double charge to budget authority. \8\With available technology, DOD should have no difficulty reconciling its year-end expenditures with obligations in time for inclusion in year-end closing reports required by Treasury.
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  First, Bowsher's decision authorizes DOD to regain access to M accounts that have been closed by law. If the Department can present convincing evidence that valid obligations were accidentally canceled because of a clerical error, Bowsher is willing to reopen the doors to the Magic Vault--but just a crack, he promises. Not very much, just for $130 million clerical error. How many more will we have? Second, Bowsher's decision authorizes the DOD to continue recording obligations and disbursements against closed M accounts--but only if the transactions were made prior to cancellation of those accounts. Third, Bowsher's decision authorizes DOD to monkey with the M accounts indefinitely. Bowsher's decision lacks a sound foundation in law. I am referring, of course, again to the 1990 M account reform law embodied in sections 1405 and 1406 of Public Law 101-510, the law that we passed in 1990 that canceled all M account authority. The intent of the law is crystal clear. There is no ambiguity in the law whatsoever: No more slush fund in the honey pot, period. I believe that the legal analysis underlying Bowsher's decision in this M account case OK'ing a $130 million clerical error to be paid for is flawed for two reasons. The first is that the M account reform legislation canceled account balances and provided no basis whatsoever for reopening them. This clear statutory directive supersedes existing discretionary authority to reopen accounts to correct clerical errors. There is nothing in the law that leaves an opportunity to go back and replace a missing decimal point or a lost number. Again, that is a $130 million clerical error that was a misplaced decimal. Next, the authority cited by the GAO is weak. The only authority that the Comptroller General gives is a handful of previous rulings by the Comptroller General and two paragraphs of dicta from Justice Blackmun's opinion in the Republic National Bank of Miami versus United States. That opinion was joined by only two other Justices. Instead, six Justices wrote concurrently to express their disagreement with the part of the opinion cited as authority for the General Accounting Office's decision. Here is the legal basis for this, I want to emphasize. The Comptroller General used previous Comptroller General opinions and then dicta in a statement by a Supreme Court Justice that was a minority view, a 6-to-2 decision. It does not seem to me, regardless of how distinguished Justice Blackmun might be, that the discussion in any way reaches the situation at hand as a basis for a legal determination for the Comptroller General to approve a $130 million clerical error. I think it is a decision made in the sand that will not stand up to authority. Furthermore, I think the decision is unnecessary. The M account reform law contains a safety valve specifically designed to address the Department of Defense's money problem. If the obligations in question are legitimate and if they are properly chargeable to accounts that have been closed by law, then the Department of Defense is authorized under section 1405(b)(7) to use current appropriations to pay the bills. So I am baffled and somewhat disturbed by Bowsher's decision allowing them to go elsewhere for $130 million. In frustration, I requested a meeting with Bowsher. The meeting took place on November 4, 1993, in my office. It was attended by the Acting Comptroller General, Milton Socolar, who made the decision in Bowsher's absence. But I can assure you that Bowsher is backing up Socolar 100 percent. The meeting with Socolar deepened very much my frustration. The meeting did nothing to address my concerns and to answer my questions. In a final attempt to clarify and resolve the issue, I went back both to Bowsher and Socolar with three specific questions. These letters are dated November 9, 1993, and I ask unanimous consent to print this correspondence, as well as the responses from the General Accounting Office, in the Record. There being no objection, the letters were ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, November 9, 1993. Hon. Charles A. Bowsher, Comptroller General, U.S. General Accounting Office, Washington, DC. Dear Bowsher: I am writing to express concern about Socolar's recent decision giving the Department of Defense (DOD) continued access to certain ``M'' accounts that were closed by law. A copy of Socolar's decision is attached for your review. It is dated September 29, 1993. I understand that you were ``traveling on the west coast'' on that date. In your absence, the decision was approved and signed by Socolar. I thought, perhaps, that you might either be unaware of Socolar's decision or maybe you just have not had a chance to review it. I am troubled by Socolar's decision and question its legal foundation. The opinion fails to address the question of why the M account reform law does not clearly eliminate any discretion to reopen closed accounts because of a clerical error, and fails to cite any binding legal authority in support of this broad discretionary authority vested in the Treasury. I shared those same concerns with Socolar during a meeting in my office on October 4th and repeated them in a letter to him dated today. A copy is attached for your information. Would you be kind enough to examine Socolar's decision on the M accounts and let me know whether you agree with his conclusions in their entirety. Your cooperation in this matter would be appreciated. Sincerely, Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senator. ____ U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, November 9, 1993. Milton J. Socolar, Acting Comptroller General, U.S. General Accounting Office, Washington, DC. Dear Socolar: I am writing to follow up on our meeting of November 4th, concerning Department of Defense (DOD) M accounts. First, I would like to thank you for your willingness to review the evidence the Army will be submitting to the Department of the Treasury to prove that $130 million in budget authority was accidentally canceled due to clerical error. You agreed to report back to me within two weeks on the results of that review. I appreciate your offer and look forward to seeing your end product. I also hope you will scrutinize other similar requests with equal vigor, because I keep hearing the Air Force has $200 to $300 million in ``obvious clerical errors'' that it is ready to present to the Treasury now that your decision has been rendered. Second, I am not convinced that your decision of September 29, 1993, that Treasury/DOD can reopen accounts canceled pursuant to the M account reform act where there have been clerical or transcription errors, is supported by law. I find your analysis flawed for two reasons: (1) M account reform legislation clearly cancels account balances without providing any basis for reopening them. This clear statutory directive supersedes any otherwise existing discretion to reopen accounts for clerical errors (refer to Section 1405 of Public Law 101-510). (2) Even if the M account reform law does not supersede otherwise existing discretion to correct clerical errors, the authority you provide for your contention that such discretion does exist is weak. Your only authority for this proposition is a handful of previous decisions of the Comptroller General and two paragraphs of dicta from Justice Blackmun's opinion in Republic National Bank of Miami v. United States, a portion of the opinion of which only three justices joined. Indeed, six justices wrote concurrently to express their disagreement with the part of the opinion you cite as authority for your position. Moreover, the discussion by Justice Blackmun does not reach the situation at hand. This is not merely a situation involving an ``inaccurate transfer'' . . . ``where money intended for one account was accidentally deposited in another.'' And in the M account situation, there is clear Congressional authority that the accounts cannot be reopened, even for clerical errors. Socolar, I urge you to clarify and reveal the basis you found in the M account statute or other binding legal authority for concluding that Treasury/DOD retain authority to reopen the M accounts to correct clerical errors. Third, I fear that your decision gives DOD continued access to the M accounts for an indefinite period of time. Your decision directs the Secretary of the Treasury to ``establish reasonable time limits'' for the correction of obvious clerical mistakes and for matching expenditures with obligations. Socolar, I do not understand why you failed to recommend reasonable time limits for recording financial transactions. As the Acting Comptroller General, you should know what constitutes a ``reasonable'' period of time for recording obligations and expenditures. Is it 5 days, a month, 6 months, or 5 years? I would like to have a specific answer to the question. Fourth, I would like to have your advice and assistance in drafting legislation to end the widespread practice of not recording obligations and expenditures as they occur. The failure to record obligations and expenditures in the books has led to a very dangerous situation. DOD could have up to $50 billion in ``unmatched disbursements''--checks or payments that cannot be matched with or linked to obligations. A multi-billion dollar pool of unmatched disbursements-- from a Pentagon bureaucrat's point of view--has many of the advantages of another slush fund. It can be used to hide illegal and unauthorized payments. As your office has reported in the recent past, this could mean that ``fraudulent or erroneous payments may have occurred without being detected or disbursements have exceeded appropriation and other legal limits,'' that is, a violation of the Anti-Deficiency Act (see AFMD-93-21, page 1). The inability to match disbursements with obligations led directly to your decision on the M accounts, and it is one of the main reasons why your auditors cannot audit the government's books--like those of the Defense Business Operations Fund (DBOF). The continuing inability to match disbursements with obligations means that the government does not know which bills have been paid or how much money remains in the various appropriations accounts to cover emerging obligations. It means DOD has lost control over the peoples' money. It means DOD does not know how the money is being spent. Financial management at the Pentagon is nonexistent. I hope you will help me fix the problem. Now, what is the best way to do it? Should we try to beef up Section 3528 of Title 31? If ``certifying officials'' were doing their jobs, as defined in Section 3528, all necessary accounting hookups would be made or established prior to payment. Unrecorded obligations and unmatched disbursements would not exist. Why are ``certifying officials'' failing to carry out their responsibilities under the law? Or is there a better way to accomplish that goal? I hope you will help me craft some remedial legislation. In doing this, we will need to work with the Governmental Affairs Committee and Hamre in the Pentagon. Your assistance in these matters would be appreciated. Sincerely, Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senator. ____ Comptroller General of the United States, Washington, DC, December 22, 1993. Hon. Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senate. Dear Senator Grassley: Thank you for your letter of November 9, 1993 expressing concerns about our decision of September 29, 1993 (B-251287). You are particularly concerned that by allowing the Department of the Treasury to correct obvious clerical errors in Department of Defense year-end reports on canceled merged balances, we are making additional budget authority available to DOD. By separate letter of today's date, Milton Socolar is responding to your specific concerns about the decision. As he explains in his letter to you, our decision does not provide the Department of Defense (DOD) with any more budget authority than it otherwise would have. I share your desire to see significant improvement in the accuracy and reliability of DOD's financial management systems. As you know, our reports have repeatedly highlighted the numerous problems at DOD in need of corrective action. Your continued interest and attention to these issues is vital if we are to make progress in solving these problems. I look forward to working with you on these important issues in the future. If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me. Sincerely yours, Charles A. Bowsher, Comptroller General of the United States. ____ Special Assistant to the Comptroller General of the United States, Washington, DC, December 22, 1993. Hon. Charles E. Grassley, U.S. Senate. Dear Senator Grassley: This responds to your letter of November 9, 1993, regarding our decision of September 29, 1993 (B-251287), that the Department of the Treasury may correct obvious clerical errors in agency year-end reports on canceled merged balances. In your letter, you question the legal basis for our conclusion that the Treasury may correct clear mistakes in the year-end reports. You also express concern that our decision would allow the Department of Defense (DOD) to reopen closed merged (``M'') accounts and to have continued access to the ``M'' accounts for an indefinite period of time. Because section 1405 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991, Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1675 (1990), canceled the merged balances, you are not persuaded that there is any basis to reopen them, even to correct mistakes. You are also concerned about the adequacy of the authorities we cited to support our decision, particularly our quotation of dicta from Justice Blackmun's decision in Republic National Bank of Miami v. United States, U.S. , 13 S. Ct. 554, 561 (1992). Treasury's adjustment of the accounting records to correct obvious errors does not, in our view, offend section 1405. As we explained in our decision, we and the Comptroller of the Treasury before us have recognized the authority of the Treasury to correct mistakes without obtaining legislation. See, e.g., 45 Comp. Gen. 724, 730 (1966); 3 Comp. Gen. 762 (1924); 2 Comp. Gen. 599, 601 (1923); 12 Comp. Dec. 733, 735- 36 (1906). This view is consistent with the judicial practice of relieving parties from the consequences of accidental mistakes, for example, by reforming legal instruments to accurately reflect the true state of facts or the parties' true agreement. See 27 Am. Jur. 2d, Equity Sec. Sec. 28-35 (1966); 66 Am. Jur. 2d, Reformation of Instruments, Sec. Sec. 48, 77 (1973). Moreover, the purpose served by such corrections is a salutary one, namely, to correct errors in order that the accounts, in this case the canceled merged balances, accurately reflect the account balances. To prevent abuse, we carefully circumscribed this authority, limiting its use to cases of obvious clerical errors supported by convincing evidence. With respect to your comments concerning our use of Justice Blackmun's remark in Republic National Bank of Miami v. United State, above, we agree that the passage quoted was dicta and, as you point out, that only two other justices joined this part of Justice Blackmun's opinion. We still think that the nub of Justice Blackmun's observation holds true, namely, that you should not need an act of Congress to correct an obvious clerical error. The separate opinion of the Court did not dispute this principle; rather, they felt it was not relevant to the facts of the dispute at hand. See Republic National Bank of Miami v. United States, U.S. , 113 S. Ct. 554, 562, fn. (1992) (Opinion of Chief Justice Rehnquist). It is important to recognize that our decision does not provide the Department of Defense with any more budget authority. To the extent that there are corrections of reporting errors resulting in restoration of canceled unobligated balances to canceled ``M'' accounts, no additional budget authority is created or provided. All obligated balances in the ``M'' accounts involved in our September 29 decision were canceled on September 30, 1993. The disbursement of any obligation that should have been, but erroneously was not, carried in the ``M'' accounts prior to cancellation will come out of current funds. The only effect of our decision derives from the fact that charges to current appropriations for obligations of canceled merged balances are limited to the unobligated balances of the original appropriation account available for the same purpose. National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1991, Pub. L. No. 101-510, 104 Stat. 1680, Sec. 1405(b)(7) (1990) (codified at 31 U.S.C. Sec. 1551 note). Consequently, in order to know how much current authority is available to cover old obligations, there needs to be an accurate rendering of the balances in the old accounts. We understand that the Department of the Army does not intend to submit its request for correction of the alleged $130 million certification error in its year-end report. With regard to the Department of the Air Force errors that you mention in hour letter, to date the Air Force has not submitted a request for correction to Treasury. Additionally, under Treasury's proposed instructions implementing our decision, agencies will be allowed to request correction of mistakes in the accounts canceled on September 30 on only one occasion. Treasury would require agencies to submit their requests for correction by May 1, 1994, and to provide convincing evidence of the clerical error. Since, as we stated in our decision, the type of clerical errors that Treasury can correct should typically manifest themselves soon after the account is closed, we have informally suggested to Treasury staff that 6 months may be longer than necessary to allow for the correction of obvious errors. We share your concern about the failure of the agencies to record obligations and expenditures as they occur and agree that this practice has exacerbated the problem of unmatched disbursements. We think, however, that current law adequately requires the agencies to record these obligations and expenditures. For example, 31 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1501 and 1108 contemplate that each agency will record all valid obligations of the government and certify to the accuracy of its obligations in its budget submission to the President and the Congress. Additionally, under 44 U.S.C. Sec. 3101, each federal agency head is required to make and preserve records containing adequate and proper documentation of its essential transactions in order to protect the legal and financial rights of the government. Further, under the Financial Managers' Financial Integrity, Act, 31 U.S.C. Sec. 3512, and the Chief Financial Officers Act, 31 U.S.C. Sec. 901 et seq., agencies are required to establish systems of internal accounting and administrative controls which provide management with reasonable assurance that obligations are in compliance with applicable laws, and revenues and expenditures are properly accounted for and recorded to permit the preparation of accounts and reliable financial reports. We think the statutes are clear with regard to the requirement for the proper recording of obligations and expenditures. What we think needs improvements is the execution of the requirement of these statutes. The reports cited in our decision point out the failure of DOD's accounting systems to meet these statutory requirements. For example, one of the reports found that the Navy has $12.3 billion in unmatched disbursements in its Standard Accounting and Reporting System. The problem there was not caused by the lack of statutory guidance, but rather was caused by the Navy's failure to comply with existing guidance, procedural requirements, and internal controls. We recommended that the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management) enforce existing regulations and procedures which require the proper resolution of this problem.\1\ --------------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\GAO Report to the Acting Secretary of the Navy, ``FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT--Navy Records Contain Billions in Unmatched Disbursements'', GAO/AFMD-93-21 (June 1993). --------------------------------------------------------------------------- We think the Department's Chief Financial Officer must take the appropriate steps to address DOD's failure to record its obligations and expenditures and that other problems we all know exist. In this regard, continued oversight by the Congress and the audit community is the more effective response. We trust that you will find this information useful. Sincerely yours, Milton J. Socolar, Special Assistant to the Comptroller General.
 
The speaker is GRASSLEY and he says  Madam President, my questions to Bowsher were as follows: What was the legal authority for the decision to open the M accounts? And, second, how long will the Department of Defense have access to the M accounts beyond the statutory deadline already passed as of September 30, 1993? Last, what kind of remedial legislation is needed to address these issues in the future if, as I stated, the 1990 law that gives the Department of Defense authority to come to Congress, if there has been a clerical error, does not fill the needs of the Department of Defense? I did receive an answer to that letter on December 22, 1993. The letters from Bowsher and Socolar did not help to bring the issue into sharper focus. What is the legal authority for allowing the Department of Defense to regain access to M accounts shut down 3 years ago? What is the authority for allowing the Department of Defense to draw on account balances that have been canceled by law? Both Bowsher and Socolar go to great lengths to deny the decision does what it is really designed to do: Help the Department of Defense get more money out of the back door. This is what Bowsher and Socolar said: Our decision does not provide the Department of Defense with any more budget authority. Madam President, that is flat wrong. All of the fuss and all of the maneuvering tells me that money is indeed the issue. More money is at stake. The $130 million sought by the Army, that was a misplaced decimal, a clerical error, has been canceled by law. It is gone, it is wiped off the books. But that is $130 million more that was spent not appropriated by Congress. Now Bowsher has dredged up an obscure legal gimmick to reauthorize that $130 million in the Army budget authority that was canceled by law. If that happens, then we are talking new budget authority; absolutely new budget authority without a bill passing Congress because the old budget authority was canceled by Congress. So, Madam President, Bowsher is creating more budget authority. I think Bowsher made a bad decision. Unless Bowsher is able to identify a solid legal foundation to support his decision, he should withdraw the authority to reopen the M accounts. And if we do not get this settled with a more justified approach by the Comptroller General, I hope we in this body for future clerical errors, whether they are $130 million clerical errors, more or less, that we will reject them as we rejected such a request that was made under the 1990 law to the Congress of the United States, because anything short of doing that is just simply, through the back door, giving the Department of Defense the authority to spend hundreds of millions of dollars of more money. I yield the floor. ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  Madam President, I ask unanimous consent that the Senate now be in a period for morning business, with Senators permitted to speak therein for up to 10 minutes each.
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  (Mathews). The Senator from New York. ____________________
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, today eight members of the Senate Banking Committee have sent a letter to Chairman Riegle, a letter which I am not only going to read, but ask it be printed in the Record. I ask unanimous consent that that letter be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the letter was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, January 28, 1994. Hon. Donald W. Riegle, Chairman, Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Chairman: Notwithstanding the recent appointment of a special counsel to investigate potential criminal wrongdoing in connection with Madison Guaranty, a failed savings and loan, the constitutional responsibility of Congress to consider the serious questions of public and regulatory policy raised by this controversy remains. Last December Senator D'Amato requested Committee action with respect to this issue. In the intervening time, numerous questions that fall within our Committee's legislative and oversight jurisdiction have gone unanswered. A review of the limited information that is publicly available indicates a variety of germane issues that command the Committee's attention. We believe that the Banking Committee would be derelict in its duty if it does not address important issues, such as: Is the RTC continuing its investigations into Madison and what is the status of any such investigation? How is it that the RTC was able to prepare criminal referrals as early as October 1992, but is unable to follow-up with a civil proceeding? Will the RTC complete any current investigations prior to the expiration of the statute of limitations one month from now? Did the RTC act as quickly and effectively as possible to ensure that the Madison bail-out cost the taxpayers as little as possible? Did the principal shareholders or officers of Madison direct Madison resources into other business ventures in which they were involved? What caused the break-down of the FDIC's procedures for detecting and addressing conflicts-of-interest when the Rose Law Firm was retained to sue Frost and Co.? Why did the FDIC agree to settle its $60 million case against Frost and Co. for $1 million, an amount that is allegedly less than the limit of the firm's malpractice insurance coverage? This Committee has a solid and proud record of addressing concerns relating to the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. We believe the Committee has the duty to review thoroughly these and other relevant issues and to obtain information that will be useful as the Committee continues to consider new legislative initiatives and to improve the existing legislative framework to ensure the protection of depositors and taxpayers. In the light of this, pursuant to Rule 26.3 of the Standing Rules of the Senate, we request that you convene a special meeting of the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs to enable the full Committee to consider appropriate Committee action in connection with Madison. We believe the Committee must exercise its jurisdiction and examine the circumstances and events surrounding Madison's operations and failure. Sincerely, Phil Gramm, Connie Mack, Robert Bennett, William Roth, Alfonse D'Amato, Christopher Bond, Lauch Faircloth, Pete Domenici.
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, before I tell you why the eight Republicans on the Banking Committee took this extraordinary action, I would like to discuss another issue pertaining to Madison Guaranty. We have on two previous occasions, January 11 and January 25, requested that the RTC--that is the body responsible for any civil investigation--tell us when the statute of limitations expires on civil actions against Madison, and we have received nothing but shocking delays and still no official response to our request for this basic information. The first letter was dated January 11; the last one January 25. My staff has been in constant contact and, indeed, we were promised a response yesterday. As of this afternoon, we still have no response from the RTC. We still have not learned when the statute of limitations runs out on Madison and Whitewater. What we have here is shocking inaction. Now we learn--and we were told this only by telephone, and it was supposedly going to be confirmed by a letter to us the day before yesterday--and then it was promised to us yesterday, and then it was promised to us today--that the civil statute of limitations could possibly expire as soon as February 28. It appears quite possible that little, if anything, is being done to protect the taxpayers and to punish the wrongdoers, or bring about a recovery of taxpayers money. During this critical period, valuable time has been lost, and this must stop. President, the clock is ticking. The statute of limitations is running out. And I have to suggest to you that this is a coverup by the RTC, which deliberately refuses to tell us when the statute of limitations is running out. Now, they have had this matter for a number of years. There has been intense interest and scrutiny, and if their attorneys are doing anything, I cannot believe that they could not tell us within the last 2 weeks when the statute of limitations on civil liability runs out. And when they ignore the statute of limitations, justice is denied. Indeed, if it is February 28, we have a right to know. If it is March, we have a right to know. If it is August, we have a right to know. We also have a right to know what, if anything, is being done. That brings me to the other reason for his statement. The Republican members of the Banking Committee wrote a letter to Chairman Riegle. Once before, I requested that the Banking Committee conduct hearings. Now, since I made that request, I must point out special counsel has been appointed, but special counsel is going to look only into criminal matters. Possible civil actions that would toll the statute is not a matter that the special counsel is reviewing. If the RTC continues to conduct itself as it has, what we are going to face is a situation where the statute of limitation has run out, there has been no attempt to toll the statute by way of a voluntary agreement. The people are going to be denied the truth and taxpayers are going to be denied the ability to recover any moneys to which they might be entitled. It was that which prompted all of the Members on the Republican side to join in this letter to Chairman Riegle. Let me read it to you: Dear Chairman: Notwithstanding the recent appointment of a special counsel to investigate potential criminal wrongdoing in connection with Madison Guaranty, a failed savings and loan, the constitutional responsibility of Congress to consider the serious questions of public and regulatory policy raised by this controversy remains. Last December Senator D'Amato requested committee action with respect to this issue. In the intervening time, numerous questions that fall within our committee's legislative and oversight jurisdiction have gone unanswered. A review of the limited information that is publicly available indicates a variety of germane issues that command the committee's attention. We believe that the Banking Committee would be derelict in its duty if it does not address important issues such as: Is the RTC continuing its investigation into Madison and what is the status of any such investigation? President, if I may interject a comment here. That is a very simple, forthright request. We do not get any answers from the RTC. Certainly the Congress of the United States has an obligation to ascertain this kind of information. The letter goes on: How is it that the RTC was able to prepare criminal referrals as early as October 1992 but is unable to follow-up with a civil proceeding? President, again, I would mention, that is a rather shocking situation. Criminally, they have moved ahead, but as it relates to the civil action, they cannot even tell us when the statute of limitations runs out. They tell my staff on the telephone that it may be February 28. They tell us that they are going to answer in writing but we have no answer. The letter goes on further: Will the RTC complete any current investigations prior to the expiration of these statutes of limitations one month from now? Did the RTC act as quickly and effectively as possible to ensure that the Madison bail-out cost the taxpayers as little as possible? President, if I may interject again--certainly that is well within the purview of the Congress of the United States and the Banking Committee to ascertain. Should we wait until the statute of limitations runs out and then have a moot and academic question? Is that what this is about? Does that not seem like an RTC coverup? I suggest it is. Let me continue with the letter: Did the principal shareholders or officers of Madison direct Madison resources into any other business ventures in which they were involved? What caused the breakdown of the FDIC's procedures for detecting and addressing conflicts of interest when the Rose law firm was retained to sue Frost and Co? Why did the FDIC agree to settle its $60 million case against Frost and Co. for $1 million, an amount that is allegedly less than the limit of the firm's malpractice insurance coverage? President, again I believe that cries out for an answer, and an answer now, not after the statute of limitations runs. President, I would point out that the clock is ticking. And there are those who, it appears to me, would like that clock to tick right on past and the American people be lulled to sleep and the Congress to be lulled to sleep. President, the letter continues: This Committee has a solid and proud record of addressing concerns relating to the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. We believe the Committee has the duty to review thoroughly these and other relevant issues and to obtain information that will be useful as the Committee continues to consider new legislative initiatives and to improve the existing legislative framework to ensure the protection of depositors and taxpayers. In light of this, pursuant to rule 26.3 of the Standing Rules of the Senate, we request that you convene a special meeting of the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs to enable the full Committee to consider appropriate Committee action in connection with Madison. We believe the Committee must exercise its jurisdiction and examine the circumstances and events surrounding Madison's operations and failure. The letter is signed by myself as ranking member, Senator Gramm, Senator Bond, Senator Mack, Senator Faircloth, Senator Bennett, Senator Roth, and Senator Domenici. President, let me conclude by saying that this matter is not going to go away. Let me say that the clock is ticking. Here we are, the end of January, and we are talking about possibly 28 days remaining to find out the answers to these perplexing problems. We understand why it is and how it is that some may be afraid to take up this question, but I have to tell you that we have a responsibility of seeking the truth. This Senator, nor any of my colleagues who joined in this letter, make no charges of wrongdoing, but I do suggest that the RTC has an obligation to be responsive not only to the Congress but to the people of the United States. We are talking about a situation where an institution has been bilked of millions and millions of dollars, and I say bilked because we find people who borrowed huge sums of money but who paid back little or none of it. We have a situation where the statute of limitations is running out, and as of February 28, if the RTC is correct in their telephone conversations with me. The statute may bring to an end any ability to pursue claims that the American taxpayers may justifiably have. The the RTC hides this in the shroud that the statute has run. That is not good enough. I hope that this body will not be a party to the RTC's silence by our acquiescence to what seems at the present time to be an RTC coverup. The American people are entitled to the truth. President, I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is NICKLES and he says  President, I wish to compliment my friend and colleague from New York for his statement in this matter. I happen to concur with his statement on this issue. I would also like to compliment Senator Dole for basically expressing some of the concerns that are needed to be expressed by this body. ____________________
 
The speaker is HATCH and he says  President, this amendment is simple and straightforward. It urges the Department of State to request that recipients of American foreign assistance recognize Israel. I do not believe that the State Department has done enough to bring down the diplomatic walls that continue to isolate Israel, and it is my hope that this amendment serves as a catalyst for action. Israel has existed since May 1948, yet 49 countries have failed to recognize her legitimate right to exist. Of this number, 32 countries receive some form of assistance from the United States. These states are shown on the map. It is imperative that these countries in particular understand the importance that the United States attaches to its relationship with Israel. In fact, it is time that the international community treat Israel with the respect it deserves. Israel has existed for almost 46 years and is the most willing partner in the peace process. It should be commended rather than condemned and ignored by members of the international community. In 1992 alone, China and India both recognized Israel. I should point out that I am pleased that Madagascar, which is on this map, decided to establish diplomatic ties with Israel beginning yesterday. Unfortunately, a large number of states have failed to follow their lead. During the past 2 years, I have personally sent letters with a number of my colleagues to the leaders of Indonesia, Pakistan, and Bangladesh requesting them to recognize Israel. I have appealed personally to ambassadors of these countries. It is hard for me to understand how the PLO can enter into negotiations with Israel and yet these countries refuse to establish ties with Israel. I do not understand why Indonesia, the largest Moslem country in the world, is unable to establish diplomatic relations with Israel. I do not understand why Pakistan is unable to do so. I do not understand precisely why Bangladesh, which has received substantial American aid during a series of natural disasters, denies one of our most important allies the most basic and fundamental right accorded to a state. I do not understand why Kuwait--a country that the United States helped liberate from Iraqi aggression--has not recognized Israel. While Kuwait does not receive direct American aid at this point, it was the most direct beneficiary of the Persian Gulf war. Most important, I do not understand why the State Department is not doing more in this area. The United States will provide over $523 million to 32 of these countries that do not recognize Israel. I believe that every U.S. Ambassador in such a country should be required to raise this issue with the host government. I believe that only then will these countries get the message that the United States is serious about this matter. The amendment to be proposed reads as follows: Amendment No.-- (Purpose: To express the sense of the Senate regarding Israel's diplomatic status) At the appropriate place in the bill, insert the following: Sec. . The Congress finds that: Whereas Israel continues to be a leader in the Middle East peace process and the only democracy in the region; Whereas on May 14, 1948, the United States was the first country to accord de facto recognition to Israel; Whereas after over 46 years of independence Israel is recognized only by 132 countries around the world; Whereas 49 countries have no diplomatic relations with Israel, including 32 that collectively receive in FY 94 over $523 million in U.S. foreign assistance; Whereas China and India recognized the state of Israel in 1992; Whereas Israel is a legitimate state and sovereign entity that deserves to be accorded full diplomatic recognition by members of the international community; Whereas the following states will receive direct and indirect U.S. foreign assistance this year and have failed to recognize Israel: Afghanistan; Algeria; Bahrain; Bangladesh; Botswana; Burundi; Cape Verde; Chad; Djibouti; Ghana; Guinea; Guinea-Bissau; Indonesia; Jordan; Laos; Lebanon; Madagascar; Maldives; Mauritania; Morocco; Namibia; Niger; Oman; Pakistan; Rwanda; Senegal; Somalia; Sri Lanka; Tanzania; Tunisia; Uganda; and Yemen. Resolved: It is the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of State should make the issue of Israel's diplomatic status a priority and urge countries that receive American aid to immediately establish full diplomatic relations with the state of Israel.
 
The speaker is NICKLES and he says  addressed the Chair.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from Oklahoma [Nickles] is recognized. ____________________
 
The speaker is NICKLES and he says  President, I rise today concerning a matter known as Whitewater--a 230-acre development in the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas that was partially owned by Bill and Hillary Clinton from 1978 until just after his election as President. They sold their interest to James McDougal, their partner in Whitewater and former owner of Madison Guaranty, a failed savings and loan institution, and they reported a $1,000 capital gains on their 1992 tax returns. But since November, there has been intense media coverage of the web of relationships, and questionable actions which raised several serious issues and questions that point to the need for congressional hearings. As most of my colleagues know, congressional hearings concurrent with investigations by a special counsel are not without precedent. We all remember the Iran-Contra independent counsel and the joint committee of Congress which concurrently held hearings. Let me state at the outset that the President, both directly and through his spokesmen, have repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. And I hope for their sake, and for the sake of the Presidency and our Nation, that they are right. But President, several newspapers with national reputations for accuracy and credibility, including the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, the Associated Press, Washington Post, and the Washington Times, have published scores of reports on this matter. Several reports strongly suggest that procedures and rules were not followed, and yes, that laws were broken that resulted in millions of taxpayers' dollars being lost. Based on published reports, here are some of the serious issues that are being raised that I believe merit congressional hearings: First, the New York Times reported on March 8, 1992, that Bill and Hillary Clinton's 50-percent stake in Whitewater was the result of ``little money'' being invested by them. Does this constitute a gift to Bill Clinton, who was then Arkansas's Attorney General, it's top law enforcement officer, and a candidate for Governor? This question is important: If a gift of money or a loan was made to help make Bill and Hillary Clinton full partners in the investment, then it might answer, in part, some of the other actions the special counsel is now investigating. Second, did Bill Clinton's 1984 reelection campaign receive money illegally from Madison Guaranty, so it could pay off a $50,000 debt owned by the candidate to another bank? In the late stages of his 1984 reelection campaign, Governor Clinton took out a personal loan of $50,000 and lent it to his campaign. The New York Times on November 2, 1993, reported that Bill Clinton put McDougal in charge of paying off that debt. McDougal held a debt- retirement fundraiser for Clinton in April 1985. Several published reports suggest that McDougal illegally diverted money from the Savings & Loan into Clinton's campaign. The Arkansas Democrat Gazette newspaper reported on January 15, 1994, that at least one person listed as having donated money at that event has denied contributing to Clinton. Third, did Governor Clinton pressure a lender to illegally issue an SBA-backed loan to Susan McDougal, the wife of his business partner? David Hale was the owner of Capital Management Services, a specialized small business investment company who by law was only allowed to lend money to disadvantaged business owners. He is now under indictment for defrauding the SBA on other loans not related to Whitewater. Hale has now stepped forward to allege that Governor Clinton not only pressured him into giving a $300,000 loan to Susan McDougal for Whitewater purposes, but that he met with the Governor and James McDougal to structure the loan. Let me quote from a Washington Times story of November 4, 1993: They all knew McDougal did not legally qualify for the SBA loan, Hale said, and at this second meeting Clinton told him that the Clinton name could not be associated with the deal, [quote], ``anywhere in this, anywhere at all.'' That is a very, very serious charge, President. This former county and municipal judge alleges that the Governor of Arkansas knowingly help defraud the Small Business Administration for a $300,000 loan, a loan he stood to benefit from as coowner of Whitewater Development. Hale said he never saw Susan McDougal in the course of issuing the loan. It was this allegation, along with Hale's indictment on unrelated charges, that got Congress' attention. Not just that of Congressman Jim Leach but the chairman of the House Small Business Committee, Congressman John LaFalce, a Democrat. On November 5, he asked the SBA for a full report on the matter. I commend him for his leadership. He asked the SBA for their report by November 15. We have not yet seen that report. The first Senator to step forward was our colleague from North Carolina, Lauch Faircloth, who in early November had the foresight to ask for the appointment of a special counsel. I commend my colleague for pursuing this matter. Fourth, did Governor Clinton in 1984 pressure his Whitewater business partner, James McDougal, into hiring Hillary Rodham Clinton to handle some of Madison's legal business? The Los Angeles Times on November 7, 1993, reported McDougal said Clinton stopped by after a morning jog to tell him that family finances were tight and ask if he could please throw some of Madison Guaranty Savings' legal business to his attorney wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. When asked how much they needed, Clinton said ``$2,000 a month,'' according to McDougal. Hillary Clinton, then with the Rose law firm, began accepting a $2,000-a-month retainer from Madison Guaranty. Several newspapers, including the Washington Post on January 24, 1994, reported that Hillary Rodham Clinton in 1985 also helped prepare a stock reissue plan for Madison to a State securities commissioner, Beverly Bassett Schaefer, whom Governor Clinton had just appointed. The new commissioner's brother had been Clinton's campaign manager. The stock reissue plan was approved. Were any laws broken? Perhaps not. But it is important to know whether, and to what extent, this obvious conflict of interest contributed to Madison's failure, which cost the taxpayers of this country an estimated $47 million. Fifth, were Bill and Hillary Clinton passive stockholders in the management of Whitewater, as they claim? The President and White House spokesmen say yes. But several media reports suggest otherwise. The Washington Times on November 4, 1993 and other publications have outlined several financial transactions by Whitewater directly involving the Clintons. In that story, the Washington Times reported that in 1987, Hillary Rodham Clinton asked James McDougal to deliver Whitewater's records to the governor's mansion. In 1988, Hillary Rodham Clinton asked for power of attorney over all of Whitewater's affairs. That does not constitute passive involvement. Those records, by the way, are apparently missing. Sixth, the Washington Post reported on November 3, 1993, that in 1989, the Rose law firm sought the FDIC's business to prosecute Madison Guaranty after it had failed, in hopes of recovering lost assets. The FDIC sought to capture $60 million. The Rose law firm settled for merely $1 million. The lead attorney was Rose's managing partner, Webster Hubbell, now Associate Attorney General of the United States. Why is that important? Remember that the Rose law firm, where Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner, had represented Madison for 15 months, during 1984 and 1985. The Rose firm sought the FDIC's business in a letter signed by then-senior partner Vincent Foster. Foster said the following in that letter to the FDIC: ``The firm does not represent any savings and loan association in state or federal regulatory matters.'' Webster Hubbell and the FDIC have a difference of opinion over whether Hubbell told them that he had a potential conflict of interest, including the fact his father-in-law, Seth Ward, had done substantial business with Madison. The Rose firm collected a fee of $400,000. President, the Rose firm had no business soliciting the FDIC for business to prosecute a savings & loan it had once represented. The FDIC clearly should not have given them that business. Just how they got the business, and why they sought it, given all the relationships involved, and given how much the taxpayers of this country lost as a result of Madison's failure, is an extremely important question. Needless to say, when they were only successful in obtaining $1 million when FDIC was seeking $60 million, and of the $1 million that was obtained, $400,000 went to the law firm, and the fact that that law firm previously represented the S&L is an obvious conflict of interest, and needless to say the taxpayers really came out on the short end of the stick. Seventh, Paula Casey was nominated by President Clinton, and was confirmed by this body, as the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Arkansas. She has a long-standing relationship with the President. She was a law student of Bill Clinton's when he was a professor at the University of Arkansas in the 1970's. She had been a campaign volunteer. On November 9, 1993, the Associated Press and others reported that she recused herself from an RTC criminal referral to the Justice Department involving the use of Whitewater in a check-kiting scheme. The criminal referral targeted James and Susan McDougal, and mentioned that Bill and Hillary Clinton could have benefited from it, although there was no evidence to support that. But the Washington Post reported on November 11, 1993, that only 2 weeks earlier, Casey wrote the RTC to concur with the Justice Department's decision that a criminal probe was not warranted. Why did she not recuse herself then? President, the Department of Justice Manual for U.S. attorneys is quite specific about recusals. Recusals are required if a conflict of interest exists, and I quote, ``because a U.S. attorney has a personal interest in the outcome of the matter or because he/she has or had a professional relationship with parties or counsel; or for other good cause * * *.'' If she found reason to recuse herself on November 9, as Whitewater was publicly unraveling, why didn't she recuse herself before it began hitting the front pages of the Nation's newspapers? It appears she violated Department of Justice rules, and we deserve an explanation. Eighth, it was not revealed until December 21, in the Wall Street Journal, just before Christmas, that two White House political aides, including the Chief of Staff for Clinton, had entered Vince Foster's office shortly after he committed suicide to remove files related to Whitewater. For 5 months, the White House and the Clinton's attorney not only had possession of records, but kept it a secret. Unlike the other issues, this one does involve the President of the United States and the White House staff. What happened to the files after they were removed from Vince Foster's office? Why were the records not turned over to the Park Police as part of their initial investigation? Did they mislead the Park Police in the course of an official investigation? Why the secrecy? What was the White House trying to hide? This is clearly an ethical matter which should be looked into. We need to know whether the White House violated ethics rules or broken the law in the handling of these files from the time of Vince Foster's death until they were supposedly turned over to the Justice Department just last week. President Clinton stated on December 23 he would turn over the documents to the Justice Department. They were not turned over until the week of January 18--over 3 weeks had transpired--and then only after they were issued under the quise of a subpoena, which keeps those records from being made public. Again, why is there secrecy? This is not some transaction that has a great deal of insight and intrusion into a family matter. This is a real estate transaction. Why the secrecy? Why are the trying to hide? Why not make these records public and answer these questions and get this issue totally behind us? Ninth, how much did the Clintons actually make or lose from their Whitewater investment? Why is this important? It raises a question whether the American people were deliberately mislead by the Clinton campaign in 1992 on Whitewater; whether as early as March 1992, a coverup was underway. In the 1992 campaign, after the New York Times first broke the story about Whitewater, candidate Bill Clinton on March 12 commissioned a full financial review of the land deal. He asked a Denver attorney and friend, James Lyons, to lead the effort along with a Denver forensic accounting firm. The Lyons report said the Clintons lost more than $60,000 in Whitewater. But the Lyons report has come under assault for not mentioning some very important facts, which have been outlined in a Wall Street Journal story of January 4, 1994. But Time magazine on January 24, 1994, after reviewing land records in Madison County, AK, came up with some new information: The Clintons and the McDougals originally brought the land for about $882 per acre in 1978. A year later, they sold the land to Whitewater Development for $1,087 an acre. Who owned Whitewater? James and Susan McDougal and Bill and Hillary Clinton. This transaction strongly suggests that the Clintons made thousands of dollars off Whitewater. If the Clinton's lost so much money, President, why did they not claim that loss on their tax returns? In their 1992 tax returns, they actually claimd a $1,000 capital gains from the sale of their Whitewater investment to partner James McDougal. McDougal himself has said the loss probably totaled about $9,000. We deserve to know the truth. There are a few other things the Lyons report glossed over. It failed to even mention Whitewater's single largest transaction, the purchase of over 1,000 acres from International Paper Corp. It failed to mention a highly unusual airplane-for-land swap between Whitewater and James McDougal involving Webster Hubbell's father-in- law, a Madison subsidiary employee. And it forgot to mention that Whitewater failed to file tax returns for 3 years. That is issue No. 10. Why did Whitewater not file tax returns for 3 years? Now President, you and I file tax returns. It is no secret that every working American, every family, every corporation in this country, by law, must file a tax return, even if they do not owe any taxes, even if they lost money. Failure to file is a crime. It was not revealed until December 19, 1992, in the Washington Post that the Clintons discovered after the election that Whitewater had not paid taxes for 3 years. Keep in mind, the President's friend, Lyons, had conducted a Whitewater review in 1992, to investigate the entire Whitewater episode. But it was not discovered until after the election that they had not paid taxes. The President-elect and Clinton directed Vince Foster, working with Whitewater accounts, to prepare the returns. They were filed in June of last year. President, Whitewater was involved in the failure of a federally insured savings and loan, a failure that cost taxpayers at least $47 million. Whitewater was involved in the apparent defrauding of the Small Business Administration. Whitewater failed to file Federal income tax for 3 years. Whitewater was the subject of a criminal referral by the Resolution Trust Corporation. And now Whitewater records under Vince Foster's control may have been mishandled, even hidden from those investigating his death. President, the Clintons own, or reported that they own one-half of Whitewater. President, how long have we been hearing President Clinton talk about the last 12 years? How many times have we heard the 1980's being referred to as the decade of greed when the rich benefited at the expense of middle-class Americans? How many times have we heard in this very Chamber the savings and loan debacle being the symbol of the 1980's? How many times did the Members call for investigations and independent counsels and actually conduct hearings? Where are they now, President? Where are the Senate Banking Committee hearings and investigations into wrongdoing involving cozy relationships and sweetheart deals between public officials, lawyers, and insiders, and sweetheart deals paid for by the rest of us? The silence is deafening. President, this matter demands not just special counsel; it demands congressional hearings. We need to do our job. We need to find out the facts. We owe it to the American people. We owe it to middle- class Americans who live by the rules, who pay the taxes, who file tax returns, and who deserve to know the truth. Again, President, I compliment my friend and colleague, Senator D'Amato from New York, and Senator Dole. I would urge that the Banking Committee would follow on their request and have an expeditious hearing, not to slander anyone, but just to find out the facts and to answer these questions that are being asked, not just by myself but they are being asked by countless Americans who want to know the truth about Whitewater so we can close this episode. President, I thank you for your indulgence, and I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator from New York.
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, I commend Senator Nickles, my colleague, for putting forth a number of questions that I think the American people have a right to know. Let me add that we have been unable to ascertain even the most basic facts. It seems ludicrous to me that the Resolution Trust Corp. could not tell us when the statute of limitations runs out--incredible. Let me say unbelievable. Let me go further and say it is not worthy of belief that after all this time they cannot say that the civil statute of limitations on actions that might be brought against those people who may have been principals in Madison is X, Y, Z period of time. They said they were studying it 2 weeks ago--2 weeks ago. Do you mean to tell me that is how you conduct an investigation? You do not even look to see when an action may or may not be capable of being brought? Then, again, when they get back to us 2 weeks later, they begin to suggest and play games and say, well, we think it may be February 28. We are not sure. We are going to send you a letter. One day goes by. Two days go by. Now we will be in the month of February when we come back here. And what happens when we ask for documents? We are told the Privacy Act precludes documents that a Congressman or Senator or his staff might want access to. That is why it is absolutely imperative that we have the Senate Banking Committee review these documents so that it takes it out of that area in which a privilege is asserted. We do not want anybody to break the law. We do not want the Privacy Act violated and it is alleged that only a committee has the right to review these documents. I can assure this body that this Senator does not intend to remain silent, that when we reconvene Tuesday I will come back to the floor to bring this up with some more explicit information, and hopefully we will have an answer to our simple question by the RTC by that time. I say hopefully, but I do not believe it. When I get that letter telling me exactly when the statute of limitations runs out, then I will believe it. We have not been dealt with squarely. We have been given the bum's rush. And I do not intend to sit by and allow this to take place. It does not take more than 2 weeks. Again, our first letter went out January 11, and here we are the end of January. Our second inquiry by way of letter was January 25. In the interim we had numerous phone conversations with staff, personal visits with RTC staffers. This is being stonewalled, and the clock is ticking, time is running. So now we have maybe 30 days after this weekend. Oh, by the way, we have the President's holiday. We may just about come back on the 28th. And at that point someone will say: Oh, my gosh, why did you not tell us before? The clock is ticking and the time has run out. It is too late. We are serving notice that we want people to know that the clock is ticking and that the time is running out and the American people are entitled to answers. I yield the floor.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The clerk will call the roll. ____________________
 
The speaker is WARNER and he says  President, I rise today to honor a professional staff member of the Armed Services Committee staff who will be departing next week after 5 years of diligent and valuable service to the committee. Col. Durwood W. Ringo, Jr., better known to all of us here in the Senate as ``Skip'', came to the committee on his retirement from the U.S. Marine Corps after a distinguished career as a marine aviator. Skip has since been a truly outstanding member of the professional staff of the Armed Services Committee responsible for all tactical aircraft programs. The advice and counsel he has provided members of our committee on these critical programs has been invaluable. Skip was well known throughout the Senate even prior to joining the committee in 1989. In his final assignments in the Marine Corps, Skip served as the Marine Corps liaison officer to the Senate and then as Director of Senate Affairs for the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs. In these positions, Skip established a unique reputation for knowledge, ability and professionalism that led to his joining the Armed Services Committee as a professional staff member upon his retirement from the Marine Corps. Born and raised in Louisville, KY, Skip graduated with a degree in civil engineering from the Citadel in South Carolina in 1967. He was commissioned in the U.S. Marine Corps and in 1969, was designated a naval aviator. He then served a combat tour as a marine aviator in the Republic of Vietnam. Colonel Ringo graduated from the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School in 1982 and has served with distinction in several assignments involving the testing of tactical aviation systems from the Navy and the Marine Corps. He is a member of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots. He was also a finalist for NASA's Shuttle Astronaut Program. Colonel Ringo holds both a master of engineering degree in industrial engineering from the University of Florida and a master of arts degree in national security and strategic studies from the College of Naval Warfare in Newport, RI. With his unique knowledge and expertise, Skip Ringo has originated and developed a number of initiatives which have contributed greatly to the evolution of tactical aviation for all the military services. As a result of Skip's efforts, the Advanced Short Takeoff Vertical Land Strike Fighter Program was created and, in fact, has become the centerpiece of the current Joint Advanced Strike Technology [JAST] Program. Skip drafted legislation which was included in the fiscal year 1993 Defense Authorization Act to strengthen joint development programs. This legislation requires that a Defense Acquisition Board be convened to allow a military service to withdraw from a joint program and requires the service which is withdrawing to pay appropriate costs into the program in fairness to the other participating services. This legislation has provided discipline essential to joint programs and will save scarce defense dollars in the future. Skip was also instrumental in the establishment of the Defense Airborne Reconnaissance Office in the Department of Defense. This office ensures greater access to tactical intelligence for unit-level commanders and functions for tactical intelligence in the same way the National Reconnaissance Office functions for national intelligence. These are only a few of the numerous initiatives and programs that have been greatly enhanced as a result of Skip Ringo's diligent and dedicated efforts. Our military services and indeed the Nation, have truly benefited from his tenure on the Armed Services Committee. President, Skip Ringo is also very active in church and community affairs. He has served as a district chairman of the Boy Scouts of America and the Eagle Scouts Association of America. He is active in the Knights of Columbus and serves as a lector and lay minister in St. Bernadette's Catholic Church. Skip resides with his wife, Patty and two sons, Chip and Drew and his daughter, Brooken in Burke VA. This wonderful example of a truly outstanding military family now embarks on Skip's third career. Having served honorably in the Marine Corps for 22 years and as a key professional staff member on the Armed Services Committee for 5 years, Skip will now enter the private sector where I am sure he will continue his extraordinary record of success. There are few members of our staff here in the Senate who are as well-qualified in their respective fields as Skip Ringo. There are few who are as diligent and dedicated to excellence in their profession and there are none as well-liked and who have as many true and good friends as Skip. No matter how intense and focussed Skip became, he was never without a smile and a good word. He truly epitomizes the term ``gentleman''. Skip Ringo will be greatly missed on our committee. I want to express my personal appreciation for his support and assistance to me, to the Senate and to the Nation and wish him great success in all his future endeavors. ____________________
 
The speaker is DOMENICI and he says  President, section 124 of the State Department Authorization bill, which is entitled, ``Property Agreement,'' provides that whenever the Department enters into a lease-purchase agreement involving foreign countries, the Department shall account for such transactions ``in accordance with fiscal year obligations.'' In my view, this provision does not waive scoring rule number 11 on scoring lease-purchases under the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990. I wonder if the distinguished chairman of the Budget Committee agrees with this interpretation?
 
The speaker is SASSER and he says  I would agree with the distinguished Senator's interpretation that this provision does not set aside rule 11. Rule 11 says that when a bill provides the authority for an agency to enter into a contract for the lease-purchase of a capital asset, such as a building, budget authority will be scored in the year in which the budget authority is first made available in the amount of the ``government's total estimated legal obligations.'' In the case of a lease-purchase, the total estimated legal obligation is for all costs of the lease-purchase except imputed interest costs and the total obligation is incurred in the year the lease-purchase agreement is entered into. The instruction to account for such transactions in accordance with fiscal year obligations is not inconsistent with the rule because the fiscal year obligation would be the total estimated legal obligation of the Government in the first fiscal year of the lease-purchase contract. It is my understanding that both the Congressional budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget agree with this interpretation of the budget treatment of section 124.
 
The speaker is DOMENICI and he says  I thank the chairman of the Budget Committee for clarifying this provision. ____________________
 
The speaker is HATCH and he says  President, I wish to take a few minutes to discuss the future of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. I have spoken in the past about the need to eliminate this Agency now that the cold war has ended. Other Members took a different view and have attached an amendment to the State Department Authorization Act that not only preserved but also expanded this bureaucratic anachonism. I believe that this was fiscal folly. We have begun the process of adjustment to the post-cold-war world. We are massively cutting our military establishment. By fiscal year 1996, we will have reduced the defense budget in real terms to less than half of the level in the peak spending year of 1985. We have reduced the National Foreign Intelligence Program budget. We will be restructuring and economizing on our international broadcasting capabilities. And, we will be cutting back on foreign aid that was sent to countries on the basis of calculations stemming from the cold war geopolitical competition. Yet the legislation to increase ACDA's authority and budget goes in exactly the opposite direction. It increases spending on an Agency born in the cold war, designed to address problems derived from the cold war, and doomed to irrelevance with the end of the cold war. bureaucratic duplication Let us remember that ACDA was created in 1961 because of a perceived lack of expertise in the Federal Government in what was then the novel area of arms control. Yet, today we have experts, offices, or agencies dedicated to arms control work in the State Department, the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff, the three major armed services, the Department of Energy, the On-Site Inspection Agency, the arms control intelligence staff of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and other parts of the Government. Arms control is big business in the Federal Government and will remain an important focus of action even without ACDA: The Department of State has more people working on arms control than ACDA does. More that 65 professionals in 13 offices of the Office of the Secretary of Defense work on arms control, a figure that rises still further when you consider arms control staff in the Joint Staff and in the major services. In the Air Force, more than 300 employees worldwide are working just on research on arms control and implementation of arms control treaties. The On-Site Inspection Agency employs more than 1,000 professionals to handle the demands of inspection trips. The Department of Energy, in its own agencies and at the national laboratories, employs several hundred people in programs related to arms control. In the Central Intelligence Agency, an estimated 100 professionals perform analytical work on the Arms Control Intelligence Staff, with hundreds more in other offices and agencies contributing to collection of intelligence information related to arms control. Also at CIA, the nonproliferation center employs an estimated 100 intelligence analysts. In addition to all this expertise inside the Government, the estimate is that the Federal Government as a whole spends $250 million on unclassified arms control research every year--that is, a quarter of a billion dollars every year, not even counting classified research. These examples only scratch the surface of arms control work and staffing in the Federal Government. The fact is that there is not a single aspect of ACDA's capabilities that is not duplicated or even triplicated elsewhere in the executive branch. economy in arms control By eliminating ACDA, as I have urged, we would merely trim the funding for arms control. It would cut back middle management, just as American business has done to become more efficient. It would get at the fat, without hitting the muscle or bones. I would like to document that fact by citing a few arms control budget figures gathered by the Congressional Research Service for the last fiscal year: The State Department will spend $81 million on arms control. The Department of Energy will spend about $250 million on arms control. The Defense Nuclear Agency will spend an estimated $80 to $90 million on arms control. The Joint Staff will spend over $100 million on arms control. To be sure, this is an incomplete accounting. I am leaving out spending on arms control within the intelligence community. But if this did represent the entire arms control budget of the U.S. Government, eliminating ACDA would represent a total cut of only about 10 percent in Governmentwide arms control spending. Surely, in light of the end of the cold war, we can afford to trim this spending by 10 percent. Surely, we can make a cut of those modest proportions without imperiling the contribution that arms control can make to our security. an agency without a mission There is widespread recognition that ACDA has become a dysfunctional agency, at best playing a secondary role in the areas it should presumably lead. Over the last three decades, the State Department, not ACDA, has led the way in negotiating arms control agreements. Arms control policy coordination has been conducted by either the State Department or within the National Security Council. Arms control treaty implementation has largely been the province to the Department of Defense and the State Department. Verification has been the function of the intelligence community collection and analysis agencies, with policy decisions on compliance issues largely handled by the State Department, the Defense Department, and the members of the National Security Council. In this respect, I would like to summarize the conclusions of two major studies of ACDA's effectiveness, one conducted by the inspector general of ACDA and the other by analysts at the Stimson Center. ACDA's inspector general evaluated the Agency's performance in terms of its responsibilities as designated in the Arms Control and Disarmament Act of 1961: ACDA's first duty is that of the ACDA director to serve as the principal adviser to the President and the Secretary of State on arms control. The ACDA inspector general's report states: * * * once arms control became important presidential business, as it did within a decade of ACDA's founding, Secretaries of State and Defense and national security advisers become the dominant figures in arms control. ACDA's second statutory responsibility is preparation and management of negotiations of arms control agreements. The ACDA IG's report states: When the ACDA Director some years ago agreed that the negotiators of the principal arms control negotiations should be State Department personnel, the decision had a very negative impact on the Agency. The report then proceeds to describe how State Department officials negotiated virtually all of the major arms control agreements to recent decades. ACDA's third responsibility is research on arms control. The ACDA IG's report states: ACDA is not now--indeed, it never has been--in a position to carry out Congress's charge to ensure the acquisition of a fund of theoretical and practical knowledge concerning disarmament. ACDA's fourth responsibility is in the area of providing public information on arms control. The ACDA IG's report reads: ``ACAD does not play a significant role in this area.'' ACDA's fifth responsibility is to operate what the 1961 act called control systems, by which it meant monitoring and inspection systems. The ACDA IG's report states: ACDA never has actually operated or directed the monitoring and inspection systems that check on foreign compliance with agreements. On this point, let us also remember that the President and Congress expressed a lack of confidence in ACDA's abilities in this area when it created the On-Site Inspection Agency to conduct verification inspections and did not place OSIA under ACDA. To sum up this report, what we have here is the inspector general of ACDA concluding that the Agency is not performing its statutory missions; that other departments have supplanted ACDA in virtually every area because they possessed expertise and capabilities in the field far superior to ACDA's; and that ACDA has been bypassed with absolutely no detrimental effect on arms control. To be fair, the inspector general argues that the agency should be revitalized rather than dissolved. I would counter that since the real work of arms control is done elsewhere in the Government, there is no reason to preserve the bureaucratic duplication and waste that ACDA represents. The second report I mentioned was prepared by the Stimson Center, which is a private research organization here in Washington. This report, issued in 1992, lays aside the statutory criteria for evaluating ACDA and tries to measure the value-added that ACDA brings to the arms control process. It concludes: In its early years ACDA enjoyed a clear comparative advantage in technical arms control expertise * * *. During the 1970s and 1980s, ACDA's contributions to policy innovation were less conspicuous * * *. On occasion, ACDA's mission to focus on the nitty-gritty of arms control has helped to concentrate human resources for specific technical tasks * * *. In general, though, these examples represent exceptions to a very perceptible relative slackening off of ACDA's ``value-added'' to arms control * * *. In the past several years ACDA has been more of a follower than a leader in generating proposals and policies. ACDA duplicates the activities of other agencies and departments. It has no distinct mission. It is providing little added-value to the arms control process. By eliminating this Agency, we could streamline Government without impairing the arms control policy process. revitalization options Let us all remember one thing: the United States has pursued an active arms control agenda not because ACDA existed but because U.S. Presidents and Members of Congress concluded that arms control would benefit U.S. security and international stability. However laudable the intentions of those who hope to revitalize ACDA, their plans will not work. Arms control is integral to U.S. foreign and defense policy and cannot be artificially lifted out of the State Department and the Defense Department. Historically, ACDA's role has diminished for three reasons. First, arms control has become such an important aspect of our foreign policy that the Secretary of State, not the Director of ACDA, dominates the diplomacy of arms control. The principal negotiators of arms control treaties have worked out of the State Department, not ACDA. Second, ACDA lacks significant field activities that would give it bureaucratic clout in the interagency process. It does little of the arms control negotiation, executes even less of the treaty implementation work, and issues verification reports that are merely derivative of analysis produced in the intelligence community. Third, over time, ACDA's comparative advantage in arms control expertise has vanished. All departments and agencies concerned with arms control have a depth of expertise in arms control superior to that of ACDA. In fact, all the studies of ACDA have documented the outmigration of experts from that Agency. The Stimson Center report notes that in the 1970's ``one began to see * * * a siphoning off of ACDA's institutional memory and expertise in key areas such as strategic arms control and nuclear safeguards technologies.'' It is only reasonable that these U.S. experts would want to leave ACDA in order to be where the action really is. President, none of the proposals for revitalizing ACDA face up to these three problems, which are the root cause of the evisceration of ACDA's contribution to arms control policy. We can pretend to provide ACDA with new powers, but in the end the players with the superior expertise and the bureaucratic clout derived from real field activities will carry the day in debates in the interagency process. Even in the Clinton administration, policymakers appeared to understand these realities. It is reported that shortly after taking office, Secretary of State Warren Christopher developed a major reorganization plan that would have created a new Undersecretary for Arms Control and International Security Affairs. ACDA's functions and some of its personnel would have been folded into this new office. I believe that President Clinton made the wrong decision when he ultimately chose not to follow this course. Most important, I do not believe that anyone can seriously argue that if he had chosen to fold ACDA into the State Department, arms control would have suffered as a result. In studying this issue and the options before us, I have heard one argument over and over again. This argument runs, ``We need an independent arms control agency, first because arms control is so complex and second, because we need a voice concerned solely with arms control in the interagency process.'' I understand the thrust of this argument, but I cannot share its conclusion. Yes, arms control is complex. But so are many other areas of foreign policy. Yet, we do not set up independent agencies just to argue such points of view. International terrorism is a complex issue. Do we have an independent agency to handle it? No, we do not. Human rights is a complex issue. Do we have an independent agency to handle it? No, we do not. International law issues are profoundly complex. Do we have an independent agency to handle them? No, we do not. Do we have independent agencies in any of these areas so that single- issue perspectives have a voice in the interagency process? No, we do not. There is nothing inherently more complex about arms control than any of these other issue areas. There is nothing inherently more important about arms control than these other issues so that we need a special- interest voice for arms control in the interagency process. On all issues apart from arms control, we manage affairs within the State Department, the Defense Department, the intelligence community, other departments, and the interagency process that brings their disciplines and expertise together. We can do the same for arms control, without in any way harming arms control. And, if we are really concerned about the deficit, we can make a small dent in it by eliminating ACDA--an agency that has clearly outlived its usefulness and whose functions can--and already are--being performed elsewhere. It seems to me, President, that ACDA could be the poster boy for wasteful, unnecessary Government bureaucracy. acda's claimed achievements President, I hold in my hand a copy of a document entitled ``Current Activities and Accomplishments.'' It is produced by ACDA. It professes to provide an account of the agency's major accomplishments of the last year and its major activities for the future. It runs seven pages. It in effect tells us what we are buying if we continue to pour tens of millions of dollars a year into ACDA. I must say that this is an interesting document, indeed a very revealing document. Here we have ACDA's best case for its continued claim on the taxpayer's money. Here we have--in effect--the resume of a Federal agency applying for continued work. President, there is a phenomenon in this town called resume padding. We all know about the way applicants will sometimes make dubious claims on their resume on the grounds that it is very unlikely that a potential employer will check on the details. Well, I have looked over very closely the resume that ACDA has provided. And, President, I must say that this document gives resume padding a bad name. I have gone through every one of the 62 items on this list, and in the vast majority the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency does not play the lead role or even an essential role. It is a bit-part player, typically duplicating the work done by the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, and the many agencies of the Intelligence Community. I do not have the time to run through every item on ACDA's list of current activities and accomplishments. Instead, I have put together a top-10 list of the most dubious claims made by ACDA on this resume: Dubious claim No. 10: ACDA asserts--and I quote--``We will be working with State in support of completion of START ratification in Ukraine and in support of START II ratification in Russia.'' President, I want to point out that when the executive branch sends a delegation to Ukraine or Russia on this matter, ACDA is not even represented. How can ACDA claim this as a major agency activity when it is not even on the plane taking our officials to meet with the Ukrainians and Russians? Dubious claim No. 9: ACDA asserts that the Agency will remain actively involved in regional arms control efforts, particularly in the Middle East. Again, what do we find when we look into this claim? We find that the State Department plays the lead role in virtually all regional arms control efforts. In fact, it is my understanding that ACDA participates only when the State Department invites ACDA to participate. As we find across the entire spectrum of arms control activities, the State Department, not ACDA, is the preeminent player for the simple reason that foreign policy and arms control cannot be separated. Dubious claim No. 8: ACDA claims that one of its major activities will be liaison with the intelligence community. Yet every department--State, Defense, Energy--conducts liaison with the intelligence community as necessary. I do not see how this can be construed to be a major agency activity or accomplishment. In fact, I would point out that ACDA is not even a voting member of the process that develops NIE's--that is, National Intelligence Estimates. Dubious claim No. 7: ACDA claims that it will provide verification guidance to the On-Site Inspection Agency [OSIA] on a regular basis. Yet it is my understanding that ACDA personnel seldom participate in on-site inspections conducted by OSIA. In even fewer cases do ACDA personnel lead such inspections. The fact is that the experts on such inspections reside in OSIA, not ACDA. OSIA does the inspections. OSIA personnel are the ones on the ground. They know what works and what doesn't far better than ACDA bureaucrats who sit in their comfortable offices in Foggy Bottom. Dubious claim No. 6: ACDA claims that its role in the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group, and the Missile Technology Control Regime process represents a major activity that justifies retaining an independent agency dedicated to arms control. Yet I have found that in the meetings of all of these groups, it is the State Department, not ACDA, that plays the lead role and that ACDA is at best a secondary player. In all of these groups, ACDA essentially is an adjunct of the State Department, which again calls into question whether in all honesty this can be represented as a major ACDA activity. Dubious claim No. 5: In several places in this document, ACDA claims to provide intelligence support. That is utterly false. ACDA is not an intelligence agency and is not part of the intelligence community. It does not collect intelligence information and is not even given full access to raw intelligence. ACDA is merely a consumer not a producer of intelligence analysis. In another place, ACDA also claims that it produces red team analyses of arms control agreements. I was a member of the Select Committee on Intelligence, and I can tell you that this same work is performed by the Arms Control Intelligence Staff in the Central Intelligence Agency and at the Defense Intelligence Agency. That's where the real expertise exists. There's no need to triplicate this work at the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Dubious claim No. 4: In the section dealing with ACDA's accomplishments of the last year, the document boasts that ACDA reviewed essentially all U.S. munitions and dual-use related exports. Yet ACDA is not a licensing agency under our export control laws. ACDA is simply duplicating work that is performed in the State Department, Defense Department, and the Commerce Department, which are the licensing agencies. I ask the members of this chamber, Do we really need yet another level of redundancy in the Federal bureaucracy? The real expertise on these issues lies in the Departments of Commerce and Defense, with the State Department handling diplomatic aspects of export control issues. I would strongly argue that three principal agencies are enough. Dubious claim No. 3: In this document, ACDA makes great claims about its participation in meetings of various commissions established by arms control treaties to deal with implementation issues among the signatories. These included the JCIC, the BCC, the SVC, the SCC, the JCG, and the OSCC. First of all, ACDA leads the delegations to only four of these commissions. And the total number of meetings for those four during 1992 and the first 6 months of 1993 is only eight. Eight meetings. That's it. Eight meetings, and ACDA makes a vaunted claim that this represents a major activity that justified keeping an independent bureaucracy tasked only with arms control. Dubious claim No. 2: ACDA is proud of the fact that its personnel served on the U.N. ballistic missile inspections teams in Iraq, and this is listed as a major achievement of the agency in the past year. What do we find when we look into this claim? One staffer. That's right, one ACDA staff member served several times as a member of inspection teams in Iraq. And we are asked to believe that this is a major achievement. What is more, ACDA pulled back from that role. I understand that ACDA's leadership was concerned about this staffer's health and safety and probably will not allow the staffer to play this role again. And, the No. 1 dubious claim about ACDA activities and accomplishments comes at the bottom of page three. It is an item entitled ``Antarctic inspections.'' President, I want to quote it in full so that there can be no misunderstanding: ACDA will assist in the planning and will participate in the two inspections to be held pursuant to the Antarctica Treaty. This is indeed fascinating. Here, in this official document, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency has made the claim that its participation in Antarctica inspections represents a major agency activity. I have looked into this major activity. This inspection will involve four to six people. ACDA will not lead the inspection team but will be represented. President, it begs credulity for an agency of the Federal Government to claim that sending one or two people on a trip represents a major programmatic activity that should be touted in a document like this before Congress. But let us take a deeper look at this item. What are the provisions of the Antarctica Treaty relevant to arms control? Article One prohibits States from undertaking any measure of a military nature, including weapons testing, in Antarctica. In negotiating the treaty, President Eisenhower sought to preclude both superpowers from building military bases in Antarctica. For the record, no bases were ever built. In fact, by the 1970's, it was clear that the Antarctic environment was so harsh that no one in their right mind would be interested in building a base there, whether or not an agreement existed to preclude bases. I have read ACDA's report on its expedition to Antarctica in 1989. In reporting on its visit to a French research station, ACDA tells us, ``The station reported no arms or munitions on station except for a 12- guage shotgun and a flare pistol.'' President, does ACDA truly believe that counting flare pistols in Antarctica is an arms control issue that deserves full funding? There is more, however. The summary finding of the report on arms and military activity reads as follows: No arms violations, military activities, storage or disposal of hazardous or nuclear materials, or activities with significant military implications were observed during the inspection. President, that was the state of play on this issue in 1989. Since then we have seen the democratic revolutions in Eastern Europe, the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, the collapse of the Soviet empire in the third world, the democratic election of the President of Russia, the disintegration of the Soviet Union, and the forging of a partnership with Russia and some of the other newly independent states. I cannot speak for my distinguished colleagues, but I am prepared to trust the new democratic Russia when its leaders state that they are not engaged in the overt or covert militarization of Antarctica. Soviet leaders never tried to do this during the cold war, and given Russia's troubles today, I cannot even imagine a scenario in which Russia's elected leadership would do so now. Yet, that does not stop our friends at ACDA from launching a full- field inspection of Antarctica. There are no military activities in Antarctica. There are no intelligence indications that would lead us to suspect military activities are underway in Antarctica. There is no reason whatsoever to believe that we need to reconfirm the findings of the 1989 visit. Yet we find that ACDA is footing the bill for all the day-to-day expenses of this Antarctic inspection trip even for participants who are not part of ACDA. I cannot understand the rationale for this inspection. However, I do understand that this trip is very popular at ACDA. I am told that officials and bureaucrats are competing to try to get a seat on this trip. President, I do not know what the constituents of other senators call this kind of spending, but in my State of Utah taxpayers call this boondoggle. I submit that arms control is supposed to enhance our security. Therefore, I have one simple question: What is the military threat to the United States emanating from Antarctica? What is the threat that requires us to spend taxpayer monies on arms control inspections of Antarctica? Why should taxpayers be providing money for an arms control inspection of a continent on which here has not been any significant military activity for almost half a century? President, this list of ACDA's activities is very revealing-- revealing about the limited value of ACDA in the arms control process, revealing about the marginal achievements of ACDA both in the interagency process and internationally, and revealing about the dubious nature of much of ACDA's spending. I could go on with more examples, but what I have tried to provide here is a representative sampling of the egregious exaggerations that ACDA has made in providing this lengthy account of its activities and accomplishments. I am not arguing that ACDA does nothing of value. I would point out that the statements in this document on ACDA's role with respect to the Chemical Weapons Convention, the activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and a few others do represent contributions made by ACDA to the arms control process. What I am arguing is this: When you look into all of the individual claims in this document, you do not find sufficient activities and accomplishments to justify the continued existence of an independent arms control agency. This document itself is proof positive that this agency is desperately struggling for ways to justify its existence. ACDA's leadership had to reach down a long way to generate these seven pages of dubious claims. In fact, as I have noted, they have had to reach all the way down to Antarctica. savings by eliminating acda President, I offered a bill, S. 1085, to eliminate ACDA. Senators Cochran and Lott cosponsored this legislation with me. It would have produced significant savings, totally $171 million over the next 5 years. I have brought with me a letter from Director Reischauer of the Congressional Budget Office that reads in part, ``CBO estimates that savings in outlays would total $26 million in 1995, $46 million in 1996, $49 million in 1997, and $50 million in 1998.'' President, I ask unanimous consent that the letter be reprinted in the Record. I know that many might argue that this is not much money, that it's a drop in the bucket when we look at the $200 billion deficits we face under the current budget plan. And, frankly, I do not find the argument at all persuasive that just because an amount of money is small by the Federal Government's standards we should not save it at all. In my State of Utah, $171 million is a lot of money. In my State, $171 million is greater than the total State revenues spent on education in even the largest school district in the State. It is almost twice the total Federal revenues transferred to Utah for elementary and secondary education in the 1990-91 school year. This body has adopted an amendment to the State Department Authorization Act to increase spending on ACDA. I believed this was a profound error, and I will be watching closely the performance of ACDA over the next year to determine whether this vote of confidence had any merit. In closing, I just want to pose a simple question. We might call it the $171 million question. Why does this body continue to ignore opportunities to streamline Government and to save the taxpayers money? Why does the Congress continue to spend hundreds of millions of dollars on an agency that is clearly a relic--a creature that should not have a continued claim on taxpayer monies but rather should inhabit a bureaucratic Jurassic Park. There being no objection, the letter was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Congressional Budget Office, Washington, DC, July 1, 1993. Hon. Orrin G. Hatch, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC. Dear Senator: At your request, the Congressional Budget Office has reviewed S. 1085, the Economy in Arms Control Act, as introduced into the United States Senate on June 9, 1993. The bill would abolish the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) and would transfer certain ACDA functions to other U.S. agencies. If the bill were enacted by the start of fiscal year 1994, it would become effective in fiscal year 1995. Compared to current law, enactment of S. 1085 would result in no savings, because appropriations for ACDA are not authorized for fiscal years 1994 through 1998. Compared to a projection of ACDA's 1993 funding level, however, CBO estimates that savings in outlays would total $26 million in 1995, $46 million in 1996, $49 million in 1997, and $50 million in 1998. These estimated savings are less than ACDA's projected appropriation for several reasons. First, S. 1085 would transfer some ACDA employees to other agencies to help carry out arms control functions. Section 6 of the bill would transfer 10 percent of ACDA personnel working on policy formulation to the State Department and would transfer 30 percent of ACDA personnel working on non-proliferation and verification issues to the Department of Defense (DoD). Based on information received from ACDA, CBO estimates that this provision would result in the transfer of about 30 of ACDA's 220 employees. The State Department and DoD would incur increased costs for salaries and related expenses that CBO estimates would total about $3 million annually. Second, once ACDA is abolished some employees would lose their jobs and would be eligible for severance pay and pay for unused annual leave. According to ACDA, employees would receive severance pay in regular intervals after the employees leave federal employment. These severance costs would be incurred in 1995. CBO assumes that payments for unused annual leave also would be incurred in 1995. Assuming 30 people are transferred to other agencies, CBO estimates that about 90 people would be eligible for these payments. Based on information provided by ACDA, CBO estimates that payments for severance costs and for unused annual leave would total about $2 million in 1995. The remaining 100 people are assumed to find other federal jobs or to retire. Finally, if ACDA is abolished at the start of 1995, another $18 million in obligations from prior year budget authority would still be spent in 1995. Enactment of S. 1085 would not affect direct spending or receipts. Therefore, pay-as-you-go procedures would not apply to the bill. Also, enactment of the bill would not affect the budgets of state and local governments. If you wish further details on this estimate, we will be pleased to provide them. The CBO contact is Kent Christensen, who can be reached at 226-2840. Sincerely, Robert D. Reischauer, Director. ____________________
 
The speaker is DOLE and he says  President, in today's edition of the New York Times, columnist A.M. Rosenthal argues persuasively for more police and prisons as the most effective ways to fight violent crime. As Rosenthal explains, ``A criminal on the loose costs society twice as much as a criminal in jail--in stolen goods, smashed property, and of course the medical care for the victims * * *. Yes, a lot of Americans are in jail. A lot more should be. If your house is burbled, there is a 1 in 80 chance the criminal will serve time.'' Attorney General Reno and other liberals in the Clinton administration may say that more prison space can be made available simply by imposing alternative sanctions on first-time, nonviolent offenders. This proposal sounds good, but as Rosenthal correctly points out, ``All those crowded jails are not filled with pot smolders caught by cops on patrol:'' 93 percent of the prisoners in State prisons are either repeat offenders or offenders convicted of a violent crime. Congress must not delay in enacting the Republican regional-prison initiative. This initiative will encourage the States to adopt important reforms, such as truth-in-sentencing, in exchange for more prison space to house violent criminals convicted in State court. President, I ask unanimous consent that the full text of Rosenthal's column be inserted in the Record immediately after my remarks. There being no objection, the article was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Police and Prisons (By A.M. Rosenthal) More and more billions for prisons to lock up more and more Americans who never had a decent chance at life. Are we mad? Why not use those billions to build more schools to give more young people living in poverty the education to climb out of it? It costs as much to keep a convict in prison as to send him to Yale, for Heaven's sake. And despite all the other billions the U.S. spends on the drug war, narcotics still flood the country, users are still being put into prison, crowding out violent criminals. Why not legalize drugs and use the anti-drug money on therapy for addicts and to improve the neighborhoods that create them? And why those long sentences for convicts? Every year behind bars makes them more bitter. They return to the same hard streets. Save money by cutting sentences. Spend the savings to give released convicts training for decent jobs. Those three paragraphs sum up a belief important in American liberal intellectual life--the belief that war against crime and drugs is largely aimed at and hurts the poor and wastes huge amounts of money that could be used to fight the poverty, discrimination and education deprivation that are the root causes of crime. The argument is false factually. Worse, it is damaging to people it is supposed to benefit--Americans, all skin shades, who live in the streets of poverty and killing. Economically the struggle against crime is the biggest bargain the taxpayer gets. A criminal on the loose costs society twice as much as a criminal in jail--in stolen goods, smashed property and of course the medical care for the victims. The drug war has not yet been won. But it has saved hundreds of thousands of Americans from lives of addiction that would have cost the country scores of billions. Nobody knows exactly how much because drug abuse is the cause of so many other crimes like family violence, robberies and muggings. Most of the crime takes place in poor neighborhoods. Drug addicts gobble up hospital space and time that would have gone to the people of those neighborhoods. Fighting crime and drugs is one tax expenditure that benefits the poor most of all. All those crowded jails are not filled with pot smokers caught by cops on patrol. Prof. John J. DiIulio Jr. of Princeton and Brookings reports that 93 percent of convicts in state prisons are violent criminals, many of them repeaters. Yes, a lot of Americans are in jail. A lot more should be. If your house is burgled, there is a 1 in 80 chance the criminal will serve time. The trouble with long sentences is that they turn out not to be all that long. Convicts serve about one-third of their sentences. A rapist can expect to be out in 5 years, a convicted murderer in 10. President Clinton now recognizes the dreadful importance of crime in American life. But if he is to lead, as he should, he ought to make sure his top officers are following on close. About mandatory sentences, his Attorney General is known to law officers as Waffle General. His Surgeon General boosts another study of the much-studied legalization of drugs. Then after he properly says ``nothing doing,'' she boosts it again. Either she does not believe what the President says or just does not care very much. Most of all, he should tell us the hardest truth of all-- how deeply criminals have hurt the already wounded of America, the poor. The President should tell us that criminals who have stayed out of jail and criminals who got out too early have turned large parts of the inner city into war zones. ``Build schools, not prisons''--that's not a choice now, it is a hoax. In war zones the money and energy of government and the people go to surviving, fighting and winning. Sometimes a little extra money and energy are spent to keep up spirits. But was there ever a case where in a war zone under attack there was enough money to make life decent and build for the future? The criminals have deprived other citizens of the greatest civil liberty--the right to live in peace. They have also deprived citizens of the treasure to build for the future. That is what the President should tell the country, for it is the plain truth and will be so until the winning starts. ____________________
 
The speaker is BAUCUS and he says  President, the Environment and Public Works Committee has adopted an amendment that revises the committee's rules of procedure. I ask unanimous consent that a copy of the revised rules be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the rules were ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Environment and Public Works Committee Rules of Procedure rule 1. committee meetings in general (a) Regular meeting days.--For purposes of complying with paragraph 3 of Senate Rule XXVI, the regular meeting day of the committee is the first and third Thursday of each month at 10:00 A.M. If there is no business before the committee, the regular meeting shall be omitted. (b) Additional meetings.--The chairman may call additional meetings, after consulting with the ranking minority member. Subcommittee chairmen may call meetings, with the concurrence of the chairman of the committee, after consulting with the ranking minority members of the subcommittee and the committee. (c) Presiding officer.-- (1) The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the committee. If the chairman is not present, the ranking majority member who is present shall preside. (2) Subcommittee chairmen shall preside at all meetings of their subcommittees. If the subcommittee chairman is not present, the ranking majority member of the subcommittee who is present shall preside. (3) Notwithstanding the rule prescribed by paragraphs (1) and (2), any member of the committee may preside at a hearing. (d) Open meetings.--Meetings of the committee and subcommittees, including hearings and business meetings, are open to the public. A portion of a meeting may be closed to the public if the committee determines by rollcall vote of the majority of the members present that the matters to be discussed or the testimony to be taken-- (1) will disclose matters necessary to be kept secret in the interests of national defense or the confidential conduct of the foreign relations of the United States; (2) relate solely to matters of committee staff personnel or internal staff management or procedure; or (3) constitute any other grounds for closure under paragraph 5(b) of Senate Rule XXVI. (e) Broadcasting.-- (1) Public meetings of the committee or a subcommittee may be televised, broadcast, or recorded by a member of the Senate press gallery or an employee of the Senate. (2) Any member of the Senate Press Gallery or employee of the Senate wishing to televise, broadcast, or record a committee meeting must notify the staff director or the staff director's designee by 5:00 p.m. the day before the meeting. (3) During public meetings, any person using a camera, microphone, or other electronic equipment may not position or use the equipment in a way that interferes with the seating, vision, or hearing of committee members or staff on the dais, or with the orderly process of the meeting. rule 2. quorums (a) Business Meetings.--At committee business meetings, six members, at least two of whom are members of the minority party, constitute a quorum, except as provided in subsection (d). (b) Subcommittee Meetings.--At subcommittee business meetings, a majority of the subcommittee members, at least one of whom is a member of the minority party, constitutes a quorum for conducting business. (c) Continuing Quorum.--Once a quorum as prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) has been established, the committee or subcommittee may continue to conduct business. (d) Reporting.--No measure or matter may be reported by the committee unless a majority of committee members cast votes in person. (e) Hearings.--One member constitutes a quorum for conducting a hearing. rule 3. hearings (a) Announcements.--Before the committee or a subcommittee holds a hearing, the chairman of the committee or subcommittee shall make a public announcement and provide notice to members of the date, place, time, and subject matter of the hearing. The announcement and notice shall be issued at least one week in advance of the hearing, unless the chairman of the committee or subcommittee, with the concurrence of the ranking minority member of the committee or subcommittee, determines that there is good cause to provide a shorter period, in which event the announcement and notice shall be issued at least twenty-four hours in advance of the hearing. (b) Statements of Witnesses.-- (1) A witness who is scheduled to testify at a hearing of the committee or a subcommittee shall file 100 copies of the written testimony at least 48 hours before the hearing. If a witness fails to comply with this requirement, the presiding officer may preclude the witness's testimony. This rule may be waived for field hearings, except for witnesses from the Federal Government. (2) The presiding officer at a hearing may have a witness confine the oral presentation to a summary of the written testimony. rule 4. business meetings: notice and filing requirements (a) Notice.--The chairman of the committee or the subcommittee shall provide notice, the agenda of business to be discussed, and the text of agenda items to members of the committee or subcommittee at least 72 hours before a business meeting. (b) Amendments.--First-degree amendments must be filed with the chairman of the committee or the subcommittee at least 24 hours before a business meeting. After the filing deadline, the chairman shall promptly distribute all filed amendments to the members of the committee or subcommittee. (c) Modifications.--The chairman of the committee or the subcommittee may modify the notice and filing requirements to meet special circumstances, with the concurrence of the ranking member of the committee or subcommittee. rule 5. business meetings: voting (a) Proxy Voting.-- (1) Proxy voting is allowed on all measures, amendments, resolutions, or other matters before the committee or a subcommittee. (2) A member who is unable to attend a business meeting may submit a proxy vote on any matter, in writing, orally, or through personal instructions. (3) A proxy given in writing is valid until revoked. A proxy given orally or by personal instructions is valid only on the day given. (b) Subsequent Voting.--Members who were not present at a business meeting and were unable to cast their votes by proxy may record their votes later, so long as they do so that same business day and their vote does not change the outcome. (c) Public Announcement.-- (1) Whenever the committee conducts a rollcall vote, the chairman shall announce the results of the vote, including a tabulation of the votes cast in favor and the votes cast against the proposition by each member of the committee. (2) Whenever the committee reports any measure or matter by rollcall vote, the report shall include a tabulation of the votes cast in favor of and the votes cast in opposition to the measure or matter by each member of the committee. rule 6. subcommittees (a) Regularly Established Subcommittees.--The committee has five subcommittees: Water Resources, Transportation, Public Buildings, and Economic Development; Clean Air and Nuclear Regulation; Superfund, Recycling, and Solid Waste Management; Toxic Substances, Research and Development; and Clean Water, Fisheries, and Wildlife. (b) Membership.--The committee chairman shall select members of the subcommittees, after consulting with the ranking minority member. rule 7. statutory responsibilities and other matters (a) Environmental Impact Statements.--No project or legislation proposed by any executive branch agency may be approved or otherwise acted upon unless the committee has received a final environmental impact statement relative to it, in accordance with section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act, and the written comments of the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in accordance with section 309 of the Clean Air Act. This rule is not intended to broaden, narrow, or otherwise modify the class of projects or legislative proposals for which environmental impact statements are required under section 102(2)(C). (b) Project Approvals.-- (1) Whenever the committee authorizes a project under Public Law 89-298, the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1965; Public Law 83-566, the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act; or Public Law 86-249, the Public Buildings Act of 1959, as amended; the chairman shall submit for printing in the Congressional Record, and the committee shall publish periodically as a committee print, a report that describes the project and the reasons for its approval, together with any dissenting or individual views. (2) Proponents of a committee resolution shall submit appropriate evidence in favor of the resolution. (c) Building Prospectuses.-- (1) When the General Services Administration submits a prospectus, pursuant to section 7(a) of the Public Buildings Act of 1959, as amended, for construction (including construction of buildings for lease by the government), alteration and repair, or acquisition, the committee shall act with respect to the prospectus during the same session in which the prospectus is submitted. A prospectus rejected by majority vote of the committee or not reported to the Senate during the session in which it was submitted shall be returned to the GSA and must then be resubmitted in order to be considered by the committee during the next session of the Congress. (2) A report of a building project survey submitted by the General Services Administration to the committee under section 11(b) of the Public Buildings Act of 1959, as amended, may not be considered by the committee as being a prospectus subject to approval by committee resolution in accordance with section 7(a) of that Act. A project described in the report may be considered for committee action only if it is submitted as a prospectus in accordance with section 7(a) and is subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) of this rule. (d) Naming Public Facilities.--The committee may not name a building, structure or facility for any living person, except former Presidents or former Vice Presidents of the United States, former Members of Congress over 70 years of age, or former Justices of the United States Supreme Court over 70 years of age. rule 8. amending the rules. The rules may be added, to, modified, amended, or suspended by vote of a majority of committee members at a business meeting if a quorum is present. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, on behalf of all Members of the U.S. Senate, I am pleased to take this opportunity to recognize the efforts of the Senate Pages. Earlier today, I had the pleasure of joining the Pages at their graduation ceremony. Despite the weather, I hope the Pages and their family and friends enjoyed the morning activities. I would like to remind the Senate of the hard work that the Pages do on behalf of the Senate. Besides tending to the needs of the Senate floor by day, many late nights are spent running errands and making up school work. Pages have the pressure of holding down full-time jobs while also meeting rigorous school obligations. The Pages have had the opportunity to meet people from different backgrounds and to witness the operations of the Senate. In addition, these Senate Pages witnessed a truly historic event in the signing of the Middle East peace accord. I hope all of the Pages will share their experiences and talents with their communities. I also hope that their experience in the Senate will inspire some of the Pages to choose careers in public service. As I told the Pages this morning, our country benefits from the energy and idealism of young Americans, particularly when they choose public service. It is a noble and satisfying career. Regardless of what career path they may choose, it is crucial that they continue to participate in our country's governing. In order for our representative democracy to function properly, it is essential that citizens stay informed and stay involved. I want to make special note of a fellow Mainer, Leslie Hendrickson, a Page I appointed from my hometown of Waterville. I was proud that Leslie was selected to deliver the commencement address at this morning ceremony. I would also like to recognize Christopher Atwood from Old Town, Maine. On behalf of the entire Senate, I extend to each of you our profound thanks for your assistance to us over the past year, and wish you continued success as you pursue your goals. I ask unanimous consent that the following list of Senate Pages be included in the Record. There being no objection, the list of Senate Pages was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: democrat pages Mary Ellen Buford, Little Rock, AR. Christopher Atwood, Old Town, ME. Slaten Bickford, Evergreen, CO. Meaghan Fitzgerald, Tucson, AZ. Marta Lazovitz, Haverford, PA. Katherine Lindsay, Helena, AR. Lyssa McDonald, Cape Cod, MA. Julie Passa, Drayton, ND. Reida Smith, Bladenboro, NC. Jessica Zelman, Buffalo, NY. Jeff Horwich, Missoula, MT. Matthew Sugarman, Mt. Laurel, NJ. Blythe McCormack, Rutland, VT. Leslie Hendrickson, Waterville, ME. Katrina Moss, Alexandria, VA. Sara Schrader, Muskegon, MI. republican pages Rosanna Minchew, Bethesda, MD. Laura Craven, Charlotte, NC. David Gelles, Kingston, RI. Toni Malkovich, Duluth, MN. Haywood Hamilton, New Albany, MS. Kelly Kindrick, Portland, OR. Chris Jackson, Louisville, KY. Kelly Evans, Avon, MN. Angela Cook, Trenton, SC. ____________________
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  President, as of the close of business yesterday, January 27, the Federal debt stood at $4,514,178,001,553.17, meaning that on a per capita basis, every man, woman and child in America owes $17,314.87 as his or her share of the debt. ____________________
 
The speaker is HOLLINGS and he says  President, I insert into the Record an article from this morning's edition of the Washington Post by William Raspberry on the subject of television violence. Raspberry writes about the research of Arnold Goldstein, the director of the Center for Research on Aggression at Syracuse University. Professor Goldstein has done extensive research in the area of violence and its impact on youth. His research conclusively finds a link between TV violence and real-world violence and supports congressional efforts to curb the amount of violence on television. According to several studies submitted at part of the Commerce Committee's hearing record, television violence increased during the 1980's both during prime time and during children's television hours. Evidence shows that children spend more time watching television than they spend in school. For example, children between the ages of 2 and 11 watch television an average of 28 hours per week. In addition, a university of Pennsylvania study documented a record 32 violent acts per hour were recorded during children's shows in 1992. The American Psychological Association [APA] also estimates that a typical child will watch 8,000 murders and 100,000 acts of violence before finishing elementary school. President, the evidence is clear. I urge my colleagues to read Raspberry's column, to consider the consequences of inaction, and to join with me in trying to reduce the level of violence on television. There being no objection, the article was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: Cut the Act (By William Raspberry) Atlanta.--``In my field of psychology, there's a lot of ambiguity.'' Arnold P. Goldstein admits. ``But after a while, there's enough research to say we have a fact.'' This, he says, is a fact: Television violence begets real- world violence. Goldstein, director of the Center for Research on Aggression at Syracuse University, is here as the featured consultant at a two-day conference on school violence. He has made a major sideline of instructing professionals--this time members of the National Association of School Psychologists-- in ways of reducing violence. His books on teaching social skills to antisocial youth--``skill streaming,'' he calls it--are respected across the nation. But he believes his work would be a good deal easier if television weren't so doggedly violent. ``There's just no question of the effect of television,'' he tells me. ``Literally hundreds of studies all point to this conclusion. The only people who seriously question the link--like the tobacco industry questioning the link between cigarette smoking and cancer--are the TV people themselves, and even many of them are coming around. Goldstein lists three main categories of effects: the aggression effect, the victim effect and the bystander effect. The first includes so-called copycat violence. ``There are 188 separate studies involving 244,000 viewers, showing that a substantial number of viewers will become more aggressive, more violent after watching violent TV shows. Younger children are affected more than older ones, boys more than girls. In terms of types of show, the violently erotic are the worst.'' He said studies show that there is more copying of violent acts when the violence is justified and/or rewarded in the script, when it involves how-to specifics and when it is shown as relatively painless, or when victims of violence are shown quickly recovering from their injuries. The ``victim effect'' principally involves an ``increased level of fearfulness about the world in general,'' according to Goldstein. ``What troubles me most, though, is the bystander effect. You know, the Kitty Genovese syndrome. Televised violence increases the degree of callousness and indifference to actual violence. People who watch TV violence become less helping toward the victims of violence and display more tolerance for higher and higher levels of aggression.'' Most of us know--or have strongly suspected--what Goldstein's meta-analysis of reams of studies demonstrate. Television knows it, too. The question is what to do about it. For Goldstein the answer is something short of official censorship but ``something beyond the tips-to-parents advice--sitting with your children, talking about the violence, monitoring their viewing, that sort of thing.'' But he doesn't know just what. I don't either. The violence-content labeling recently adopted by the industry (following a major public outcry and congressional hearings) is a help, but principally for at- home parents of small children. Older children, including ``latchkey kids'' who baby-sit themselves until their parents get home, won't bother with the labels--except, perhaps, as a guide to which are the really cool shows. Various channel-blocking devices could be helpful in locking out, say, certain cable channels. But what parent would take the time to check each day's listing and block out specific objectionable shows (assuming it was clear which shows were objectionable and assuming there were machines capable of such selective blocking)? And who, in households where parents can't tape tonight's ``Jeopardy'' without help from the kids, would program those machines? (``Okay, Mom, I've got it set so it'll only get PBS and the `Gospel Hour.' You and Dad have a nice evening.'') The violent influence cited by Goldstein--he says there are, on average, eight violent acts per prime-time hour on television--may be beyond the means of technology to control. Indeed, it's hard to see what, within the confines of the First Amendment, might control it. The most frequently mentioned alternative is a boycott of sponsors of worst- offending programs. But there are two problems with that. First, many cable shows (including some of the raunchiest and most gratutiously violent on television) are unsponsored. And second, the reason TV operators keep bringing us this stuff-- which is scaring us, numbering us and, yes, killing us--is that they are privy to our dirty little secret: We want it. ____________________
 
The speaker is BAUCUS, and he says  from the Committee on Environment and Public Works, without amendment: H.R. 1303. A bill to designate the Federal Building and United States Courthouse located at 402 East State Street in Trenton, New Jersey, as the ``Clarkson S. Fisher Federal Building and United States Courthouse''. H.R. 2223. A bill to designate the Federal building located at 525 Griffin Street in Dallas, Texas, as the ``A. Maceo Smith Federal Building''. H.R. 2555. A bill to designate the Federal building located at 100 East Fifth Street in Cincinnati, Ohio, as the ``Potter Stewart United States Courthouse''. By
 
The speaker is BAUCUS, and he says  from the Committee on Environment and Public Works, with an amendment and an amendment to the title: H.R. 2559. A bill to designate the Federal building located at 601 East 12th Street in Kansas City, Missouri, as the ``Richard Bolling Federal Building''. By
 
The speaker is BAUCUS, and he says  from the Committee on Environment and Public Works, without amendment: H.R. 2868. A bill to designate the Federal building located at 600 Camp Street in New Orleans, Louisiana, as the ``John Minor Wisdom United States Courthouse''. H.R. 3186. A bill to designate the United States Courthouse located in Houma, Louisiana, as the ``George Arceneaux, Jr., United States Courthouse''. H.R. 3356. A bill to designate the United States courthouse under construction at 611 Broad Street, in Lake Charles, Louisiana, as the ``Edwin Ford Hunter, Jr., United States Courthouse''. S. 812. A bill to designate the Federal Courthouse in Denver, Colorado, as the ``Byron White Federal Courthouse'', and for other purposes. S 1206. A bill to redesignate the Federal building located at 380 Trapelo Road in Waltham, Massachusetts, as the ``Frederick C. Murphy Federal Center''. S 1314. A bill to designate the United States Courthouse located in Bridgeport, Connecticut as the ``Brien McMahon Federal Building''. S. 1650. A bill to designate the United States Courthouse for the Eastern District of Virginia in Alexandria, Virginia, as the Albert V. Bryan United States Courthouse. ____________________
 
The speaker is CONRAD: and he says  S. 1808. A bill to amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to allow States to regulate the disposal of municipal solid waste generated outside of the State, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. By
 
The speaker is SASSER: and he says  S. 1809. A bill to achieve greater cooperation from allies of the United States and international organizations for the payment of the costs involved in the development and production of Theater Missile Defense systems; and to amend title 10, United States Code, to establish a Theater Missile Defense Cooperation Account; to the Committee on Armed Services. ____________________
 
The speaker is CONRAD: and he says  S. 1808. A bill to amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to allow States to regulate the disposal of municipal solid waste generated outside of the State, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. the solid waste disposal act of 1994
 
The speaker is CONRAD and he says  President, this morning I rise to introduce legislation with respect to the problem of interstate transportation of municipal solid waste. All across America, the trash is stacking up. We are seeing the garbage merchants of America try to find new places to take what has been produced in certain States that have pretty much filled their landfills. Now they are searching for new targets of opportunity. Where are they going to dump these mounds and mounds of trash and garbage? We are talking about some 15 to 18 million tons that are now moving across State borders every year. That number is doing nothing but growing. Already the target States have become quite clear. They are looking at a State like mine, the State of North Dakota, large vast acreage, low population. They are looking at States like the State of the distinguished occupant of the chair, the State of Nebraska. They are looking at Montana; they are looking at South Dakota; they are looking at the heartland of the country. These States ought to have an ability to make a decision on what comes into their States. That is fundamental. Currently, whenever a State takes action, lawsuits are brought and the argument is made that under the commerce clause of the Constitution, a State cannot do anything to inhibit what moves in interstate commerce. They cannot do anything unless the Congress takes action. That is what my bill is all about--allowing the States to take action. It seems abundantly fair and reasonable that a State ought to the able to determine what sort of waste comes into its borders, what is dumped there and how it is treated. President, you as a former Governor of a State I think would be among the first to recognize that a Governor ought to be able to make a determination as to whether or not certain shipments are brought into the State that that Governor presides over. My legislation provides for that. Second, my legislation provides that the entire affected local community ought to make a decision on what comes into that town or that city. Right now we have a situation in which a very small town--in my State, we have four towns that are incorporated that have 10 people or less in them--might make a decision that affects a much larger community very close by. My legislation says the Governor ought to be able to make a determination on what the affected community is and that affected community should make a determination on what comes into it. Third, my legislation provides that there ought to be full disclosure before any permit is granted for interstate waste. What are the economic implications? What are the environmental effects? What are the long-term plans of the company that is pursuing a waste permit? We have seen examples around the country where a local entity would get a permit for a landfill and then a large out-of-State interest would come in and buy that local entity, greatly expand the permit, and there was very little that could be done at the local level. That should not be the case. The local community ought to know what is the future plan before any permit is granted. In addition, they ought to have financial disclosure. What is the financial strength of the company? What is the ability of that company to assure that the proper environmental and health standards are pursued? Finally, there ought to be full disclosure on the background of the companies that are seeking these permits. What is their history of violation of the terms of permits that have been granted to them in other locations? That ought to be made known to local and State authorities before any permits are granted. So, President, I rise today to introduce this bill which I think is the toughest bill on interstate waste that has ever been introduced in the U.S. Senate. I do it because local units of government, States and communities ought to have the right to protect themselves. They ought to be able to make decisions on what is going to come into their cities and States, and they ought to have full disclosure of what it all means. That is what this legislation provides. I have already talked to Senator Coats, of Indiana, who has been a leader in this area, and have asked him to give close consideration to the legislation and also that we move forward with those who are in States that, frankly, are surplus producers of waste so that we can reach some agreement in the near future. I ask unanimous consent that a copy of the legislation be printed in the Record. There being no objection, the bill was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows: S. 1808 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, SECTION 1. AUTHORITY TO REGULATE OUT-OF-STATE WASTE. Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6941 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC. 4011. AUTHORIZATION FOR STATES TO REGULATE MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE GENERATED IN ANOTHER STATE. ``(a) Authority to Regulate.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State is authorized to enact and enforce a State law that regulates the treatment, incineration, and disposal of municipal solid waste generated in another State. ``(2) Authorities.--A State law referred to in paragraph (1) may include provisions for-- ``(A) the imposition of a ban or limit on the importation of municipal solid waste generated outside of the State; and ``(B) the collection of differential fees or other charges for the treatment, incineration, or disposal of municipal solid waste generated in another State. ``(b) Local Government Approval.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2) or as otherwise provided under State law, the owner or operator of a landfill, incinerator, or other waste disposal facility in a State may not accept for treatment, incineration, or disposal any municipal solid waste generated outside of the State unless the owner or operator has obtained a written authorization to accept the waste from-- ``(A) the affected local government; and ``(B) any affected local solid waste planning unit established pursuant to the law of the State. ``(2) Exceptions.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to an owner or operator of a landfill, incinerator, or other waste disposal facility that-- ``(i) otherwise complies with all applicable laws of the State in which the facility is located relating to the treatment, incineration, or disposal of municipal solid waste; and ``(ii) during 1992, accepted for treatment, incineration, or disposal municipal solid waste generated outside of the State. ``(B) Existing authorizations.--An owner or operator of a facility described in paragraph (1) who, prior to the date of enactment of this section, obtained a written authorization from-- ``(i) the appropriate official of a political subdivision of the State (as determined by the State); and ``(ii) any affected local solid waste planning unit established pursuant to the law of the State, to carry out the treatment, incineration, or disposal of municipal solid waste generated outside of the State shall, during the applicable period of the authorization, be considered to be in compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1). ``(C) Facilities under construction.--If, prior to the date of enactment of this section, an appropriate political subdivision of a State (as determined by the State) and any affected local solid waste planning unit established pursuant to the law of the State issued a written authorization for a facility that is under construction, or is to be constructed, to accept for treatment, incineration, or disposal municipal solid waste generated outside of the State, at such time as the construction is completed, the owner or operator of the facility shall be considered to be in compliance with the requirements of paragraph (1) during the applicable period of the authorization. ``(3) Expansion of facilities.--An owner or operator who expands a landfill, incinerator, or other waste disposal facility shall be required to obtain the applicable authorizations required under paragraph (1) prior to accepting for treatment, incineration, or disposal municipal solid waste that is generated outside of the State. ``(4) Prior disclosure.--Prior to formal action with respect to an authorization to receive municipal solid waste or incinerator ash generated outside of the State, the affected local government and the affected local solid waste planning unit shall-- ``(A) require and make readily available to the Governor, adjoining Indian tribes, and other interested persons for inspection and copying, from the owner or operator of the facility seeking the authorization-- ``(i) a brief description of the planned facility, including a description of the facility size, ultimate waste capacity, and anticipated monthly and yearly waste quantity to be handled; ``(ii) a map of the facility site that indicates-- ``(I) the location of the facility in relation to the local road system and topographical and hydrological features; and ``(II) any buffer zones and facility units to be acquired by the owner or operator of the facility; ``(iii) a description of the then current environmental characteristics of the site, including information regarding-- ``(I) ground water resources; and ``(II) alterations that may be necessitated by or occur as a result of the facility; ``(iv) a description of-- ``(I) appropriate environmental controls to be utilized on the site, including run-on or run-off management, air pollution control devices, source separation procedures, methane monitoring and control, landfill covers, liners, leachate collection systems, and monitoring and testing programs; and ``(II) any waste residuals generated by the facility, including leachate or ash, and the planned management of the residuals; ``(v) a description of the site access controls to be employed, and roadway improvements to be made, by the owner or operator, and an estimate of the timing and extent of increased local truck traffic; ``(vi) a list of all required Federal, State, and local permits required to operate the landfill and receive waste generated outside of the State; ``(vii) estimates of the personnel requirements of the facility, including information regarding the probable skill and education levels required for jobs at the facility that distinguishes between employment statistics for pre- and post-operational levels; ``(viii)(I) information with respect to any violations of regulations by the owner or operator, or subsidiaries; ``(II) the disposition of enforcement proceedings taken with respect to the violations; and ``(III) corrective action and rehabilitation measures taken as a result of the proceedings; ``(ix) information required by State law to be provided with respect to gifts, contributions, and contracts by the owner or operator to any elected or appointed public official, agency, institution, business, or charity located within the affected local area to be served by the facility; ``(x) information required by State law to be provided by the owner or operator with respect to compliance by the owner or operator with the State solid waste management plan in effect pursuant to section 4007; ``(xi) information with respect to the source and amount of capital required to construct and operate the facility in accordance with the information provided under clauses (i) through (vii); and ``(xii) information with respect to the source and amount of insurance, collateral, or bond secured by the applicant to meet all Federal and State requirements; ``(B) provide opportunity for public comment, including at least 1 public hearing; and ``(C) not less than 30 days prior to formal action-- ``(i) publish notice of the action in a newspaper of general circulation; and ``(ii) notify the Governor, adjoining local governments, and any adjoining Indian tribes. ``(c) Designation of Affected Local Government.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Governor of each State shall, for the purpose of this section, designate the type of political subdivision of the State that shall serve as the affected local government with respect to authorizing a facility to accept for treatment, incineration, or disposal of municipal solid waste generated outside of the State. If the Governor of a State fails to make a designation by the date specified in this subsection, the affected local government shall be the public body with primary jurisdiction over the land or use of the land on which the facility is located. ``(d) Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Affected local government.--The term `affected local government' means the elected officials of the political subdivision of the State in which a facility for the treatment, incineration, or disposal of municipal solid waste is located (as designated by the State pursuant to subsection (c)). ``(2) Affected local solid waste planning unit.--The term `affected local solid waste planning unit' means a planning unit established pursuant to State law that has-- ``(A) jurisdiction over the geographic area in which a facility referred to in paragraph (1) is located; and ``(B) authority relating to solid waste management planning. ``(3) Governor.--The term `Governor' means the Governor of a State or the equivalent official of the State if the State does not have a Governor. ``(4) Municipal solid waste.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `municipal solid waste' means refuse, and any nonhazardous residue generated from the combustion of the refuse, generated by-- ``(i) the general public; or ``(ii) a residential, commercial, or industrial source (or any combination of the sources). ``(B) Composition.--The term includes refuse that consists of paper, wood, yard waste, plastic, leather, rubber, or other combustible or noncombustible material such as metal or glass (or any combination of the materials). ``(C) Exclusions.--The term does not include-- ``(i) hazardous waste identified pursuant to section 3001; ``(ii) waste resulting from an action taken pursuant to section 104 or 106 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9604 or 9606); ``(iii) any material collected for the purpose of recycling or reclamation; ``(iv) waste generated in the provision of service in interstate, intrastate, foreign, or overseas air transportation; ``(v) industrial waste (including debris from construction or demolition) that is not identical to municipal solid waste in composition and physical and chemical characteristics; and ``(vi) medical waste that is segregated from municipal solid waste.''. ____________________
 
The speaker is SPECTER and he says  (for himself, Helms, and Roth) proposed an amendment to the bill (S. 1281) to authorize appropriations for the fiscal years 1994 and 1995 for the Department of State, the U.S. Information Agency, and related agencies, to provide for the consolidation of international broadcasting activities, and for other purposes; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, insert the following section: SEC. 714. BILATERAL ASSISTANCE AND INTERNATIONAL LENDING REQUIRED TO BE COLLATERALIZED BY PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, MINERALS, OR OTHER COMMODITIES. (a) United States Action.--(1) Immediately upon enactment of this Act, to the greatest extent possible, all bilateral loans or credits extended by the United States to government and nongovernment entities of the independent states of the former Soviet Union must be collateralized by reserves of petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities and any revenues earned from the sales thereof. (2) Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, with respect to 1994, and not later than January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the President of the United States shall certify to Congress that, with respect to all bilateral loans or credits extended to the independent states of the former Soviet Union, all opportunities to seek collateral for such loans or credits have been considered and that, in the case of such loans which are not collateralized, such states are adhering to the debt repayment schedules stipulated by the terms of such loans or credits. (3) If the President cannot certify that the conditions contained in paragraph (2) for any state or entity in such state have been met, then no further bilateral loans or credits to that state of entity in such state shall be extended in that calendar year. (b) Multilateral Actions.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and not later than January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall-- (1) certify that each independent state of the former Soviet Union is adhering to the debt repayment schedules stipulated by multilateral lending institutions; or (2) with respect to any state or entity in such state that is not adhering to such schedules, direct the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the United States executive directors to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to propose that such institutions establish policies in opposition to the extension of any credit, or the issuance of any guarantee with respect to any credit, in that calendar year, for the purpose of assisting that state or entities in such state unless such credits or guarantees are collateralized by reserves of petroleum products, minerals, or other commodities and any revenues earned from the sales thereof. (c) Use of Collateral.--With respect to all bilateral and multilateral loans for which collateral is obtained, such collateral shall be converted in such a way as not to unduly disrupt the underlying markets of the relevant commodity. Bilateral and multilateral loans made explicitly for humanitarian purposes shall not be subject to the terms specified in this section. (d) Exception: (e) Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``independent states of the former Soviet Union'' has the same meaning given to that term by section 3 of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 U.S.C. 5801); and (2) the term ``petroleum product'' means crude oil, residual fuel oil, or any refined petroleum product (including any natural liquid and any natural gas liquid product). ______ ROTH AMENDMENT NO. 1288
 
The speaker is ROTH and he says  proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate point, insert the following: The Senate finds that in the post-Cold War period, the international community expects the United Nations to play a larger role, particularly in peacekeeping operations that may, on occasion, require the use of force against determined aggressors; That in the past five years the United Nations has engaged in more peacekeeping operations than in the preceding forty, That the Security Council is the U.N. body chiefly responsible for matters of peace and security; That the United Nations structure and the Security Council's roster of permanent members have remained largely unchanged since the United Nations was founded almost half a century ago; That Japan and Germany, as the world's second and third largest economies, respectively, have attained levels of global reach and influence equal to or surpassing current permanent members of the Security Council; That both Japan and Germany have announced their desire to gain permanent membership in the Security Council; That any country accorded permanent membership must be capable of fulfilling the responsibilities of such status, including participation in any U.N. military operations; That according permanent membership to nations not capable of carrying out these responsibilities will allow those countries to play a central role in shaping U.N. peacekeeping operations which could endanger the lives of American and other troops, but in which their own forces could play no part; That, currently, in both Japan and Germany the prevailing view is that each country is prohibited from carrying out all the responsibilities that permanent membership entails and appears reluctant to make the changes necessary to gain those capabilities; That in Japan's case, further reconciliation with its Asian neighbors who suffered during the World War II period is recommended; Now, therefore, it is the sense of the Senate that: (1) In principle, the United States should support both Japan and Germany in their wish to gain permanent membership in the United Nations Security Council; but (2) Neither Japan nor Germany should be admitted as permanent members until they are capable of discharging the full range of responsibilities accepted by all current permanent members of the Security Council. ______ KASSEBAUM (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 1289
 
The speaker is BYRD and he says  (for Kassebaum for herself, Simpson, D'Amato, and Byrd) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place, insert the following: (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) in the last decade applications for asylum have greatly exceeded the original 5,000 annual limit provided in the Refugee Act of 1980, with more than 150,000 asylum applications filed in FY 93, and the backlog of cases growing to the current level of 355,000; (2) this flood of asylum claims has swamped the system, creating delays in the processing of applications of up to several years; (3) the delay in processing asylum claims due to the overwhelming numbers has contributed to numerous problems, including: (A) an abuse of the asylum laws by fraudulent applicants whose primary interest is obtaining work authority in the United States while their claim languishes in the backlogged asylum processing system; (B) the growth of alien smuggling operations, often involving organized crime; (C) a drain on limited resources resulting from the high cost of processing frivolous asylum claims through our multi- layered system; and (D) an erosion of public support for asylum; (4) Asylum, a safe haven protection for aliens abroad who cannot return home, has been perverted by some aliens who use asylum claims to circumvent our immigration and refugee laws and procedures; (5) a comprehensive revision of our asylum law and procedures is required to address these problems. (b) Policy.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) asylum is a process intended to protect certain aliens in the United States who, because of events occurring after their arrival here, cannot safely return home; (2) persons outside their country of nationality who have a well-founded fear of persecution if they return should apply for refugee status with the local UNHCR, or other relevant international organization, office or at one of our refugee processing centers abroad, if possible; (3) the immigration, refugee and asylum laws of the United States should be reformed to provide: (A) a procedure for the expeditious exclusion of asylum applicants who arrive at a port-of-entry with fraudulent documents, or no documents, and make a non-credible claim of asylum; and (B) the immigration, refugee, and asylum laws of the United States should be reformed to provide for a streamlined affirmative asylum processing system for asylum applicants who make their application after they have entered the United States. ______ HELMS (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 1290
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  (for himself, DeConcini, Coats, and Brown) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, insert the following: SEC. . CHINESE FLEEING COERCIVE POPULATION CONTROL POLICIES. (1) Pursuant to paragraph (42)(A) of section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(42)(A)), all adjudicators of asylum or refugee status shall give fullest possible consideration to applications from nationals of the People's Republic of China who express a fear of persecution upon return to that country because they refuse to abort a pregnancy or resist surgical sterilization in violation of Chinese Communist Party directives on population, or who demonstrate that they have experienced persecution on account of such refusal, if such refusal is or was undertaken with full awareness of the urgent priority assigned to such directives by all levels of the Chinese government, and full awareness of the severe consequences which may be imposed for violation of such directives. (2) In view of the urgent priority assigned to the ``one couple, one child'' policy by high level Chinese Communist Party officials and local party cadres at all levels, as well as the severe consequences commonly imposed for violations of that policy, which are regarded as ``political dissent,'' refusal to abort or to be sterilized, as described in subsection (a) of this section, shall be viewed as an act of political defiance justifying a ``well-founded fear of persecution'' sufficient to establish refugee status under paragraph (42)(A) of section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(42)(A)). (3) All other factors which may contribute to a determination of asylum or refugee status in such cases are to be given additional weight by asylum and refugee adjudicators, such factors including, but not limited to, overt political activities while in the United States or third countries, membership in an ethnic or religious minority, family background and history, or suspicion of ``counterrevolutionary'' activities by Chinese Communist Party officials. (4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to necessitate a grant of asylum or refugee status to any individual who is ineligible for admission to the United States under section 212(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)). The Secretary of State and the Attorney General shall, within 30 days of enactment of this section, promulgate regulations and guidelines to carry out the provisions of this section. (6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as-- (A) Shifting the burden of providing, in each individual case, facts sufficient to establish a claim of asylum or refugee status as described in subsection (a) of this section, from any person making such claim of asylum or refugee status to the Attorney General; or (B) Requiring the Attorney General to disprove such claim in the absence of proof of facts sufficient to establish a claim of refugee or asylum status as described in subsection (a) of this section by any person making such claim. (7) The number of persons receiving political status solely because of the provisions of this section shall not exceed 1,000 in any fiscal year. (8) The Attorney General shall not be obligated to grant political asylum to any person claiming to qualify under subsection (a) if the Attorney General proves by clear and convincing evidence that such person has claimed such status solely for the purposes of evading the immigration laws of the United States. (9) The provisions of this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this section or any other provision of law, all adjudicators of asylum or refugee status shall apply the provisions of this section to every case, administrative or judicial proceeding, or appeal that is pending on the date of enactment of this Act, and to any claim that arises on or after such date of enactment. ______ HELMS AMENDMENT NO. 1291
 
The speaker is HELMS and he says  proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: SECTION 1. POLICY REGARDING THE CONDITIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA SHOULD MEET TO CONTINUE TO RECEIVE NONDISCRIMINATORY MOST-FAVORED-NATION TREATMENT. It is the sense of the Senate that the People's Republic of China should not continue to be accorded non-discriminatory most-favored-nation treatment by the United States, unless the President reports to the Congress that the government of that country-- (1) has taken appropriate actions to begin adhering to the provisions of the universal Declaration of Human Rights in China and Tibet; (2) is allowing unrestricted emigration of the citizens who desire to leave China for reasons of political or religious persecution to join family members abroad, or for other valid reasons; (3) has provided as acceptable accounting and release of-- (A) Chinese citizens detained, accused, or sentenced as a result of the nonviolent expression of their political beliefs in relation to events which occurred during and after the violent repression of demonstrations in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989; and (B) other citizens detained, accused, or sentenced for the nonviolent expression of their political beliefs or for peacefully exercising their internationally guaranteed rights of freedom of speech, association,and assembly; (4) has taken effective, verifiable action to prevent export of products to the United States manufactured wholly or in part by convict, forced, or indentured labor and has complied with the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding signed on August 7, 1992, by allowing, without limitation or restriction, United States Customs officials to visit places suspected of producing such goods for export; and (5) has made overall significant progress in-- (A) ceasing religious persecution and lifting restrictions on freedom of religious belief in the People's Republic of China and Tibet; (B) releasing leaders and members of religious groups detained, imprisoned, or under house arrest for expression of their religious beliefs; (C) ceasing financial and other incentives to encourage non-Tibetans to relocate in Tibet, including development and other projects which bring in substantial numbers of non- Tibetan workers; (D) ceasing unfair and discriminatory trade practices which restrict and unreasonably burden American business; (E) providing United States exporters fair access to Chinese markets, including lowering tariffs, removing nontariff barriers, and increasing the purchase of United States goods and services; (F) adhering to the guidelines and parameters of the Missile Technology Control Regime and the controls adopted by the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Australian Group on Chemical and Biological Arms; (G) adhering to the Joint Declaration on Hong Kong that was entered into between the United Kingdom and the People's Republic of China; (H) cooperating with United States efforts to obtain an acceptable accounting of United States military personnel who are listed as prisoners of war or missing in action as a result of their service in-- (i) the Korean conflict; or (ii) the Vietnam conflict; (I) ceasing the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts; and (J) providing international human rights and humanitarian groups access to prisoners, trails, and places of detention. ______ KERRY AMENDMENT NO. 1292
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: Technical Amendments to S. 1281 SEC. 101(b). LIMITATIONS. In subsection 101(b)(1)(A), page 8, line 8, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; In subsection 101(b)(1)(B), page 8, line 13, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; In subsection 101(b)(2), page 8, line 20, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''; and In subsection 101(b)(3), page 9, line 1, strike ``available'', and insert ``appropriated''. SEC. 104. MIGRATION AND REFUGEE ASSISTANCE. In subsection (A)(1)(B), page 12, line 13, strike ``available'' and insert ``appropriated''. SEC. 114. INTERNATIONAL LITIGATION FUND. Strike the two sentences starting on page 18, line 3 and ending on page 18, line 7 (viz., ``The ILF shall be available to such extent and in such amounts as may be provided in advance in appropriations Acts. Amounts so provided are authorized to remain available without fiscal year limitation.'') and insert the following: ``The ILF may be available without fiscal year limitation. Funds otherwise available to the Department for the purposes of this paragraph may be credited to the ILF.''. SEC. 115. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATORY CONTRACTS. In subsection (b), on page 21, line 4, strike ``on'' and insert ``of''; and In subsection (d), on page 23, line 1, strike ``OF'' and insert ``AND''. SEC. 116. EMERGENCIES IN THE DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR SERVICE. Insert after ``striking'' the following: ````and the Foreign Service''; and by striking''. SEC. 118. VISAS. In section 118(a)(3), on page 25, line 10, strike ``$56,000,000'' and insert ``$107,500,000''; and At the end of subsection (a), on page 25, after line 10, add the following new paragraph: ``(4) The provisions of the Act of August 18, 1856 (Revised Statutes 1726-28; 22 U.S.C. 2212-14) concerning accounting for consular fees shall not apply to fees collected under this subsection.''. SEC. 119. ROLE OF THE FOREIGN SERVICE INSTITUTE. Strike everything after the section title and insert the following: Chapter 7 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 is amended-- (1) in the chapter title, by sriking ``Foreign Service Institute,''; (2) in section 701 (22 U.S.C. 4021)-- (A) by striking the section title and inserting ``Institution for Training.''; (B) in subsection 701(a)-- (i) by striking ``the Foreign Service Institute (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the ``Institute'')'' and inserting ``an institution or center for training (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the ``institution'')''; and (ii) by striking ``Institute'' and inserting ``institution''; (C) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) The Secretary of State is authorized to provide for special professional foreign affairs training and instruction of employees of foreign governments through the institution. ``(2) Training and instruction under paragraph (1) shall be on a reimbursable or advance-of-funds basis. Such reimbursements or advances to the Department of State may be provided by an agency of the United States Government or by a foreign government and shall be credited to the currently available applicable appropriation account. ``(3) Training should be made available in the first instance to officials from newly emerging democratic nations, and then to other nations as deemed to be in the national interest of the United States. ``(4) The authorities of section 704 shall apply to training and instruction provided under this section.''; (3) in subsection 701(b) and sections 702, 704, 705, and 707, by striking ``Foreign Service Institute'' and ``Institute'' wherever they appear and inserting ``institution''. SEC. 131. UNDER SECRETARY AND ASSISTANT SECRETARY POSITIONS. In subsection (b), on page 32, line 24, insert ``of'' before ``title''; and In subsection (e), on page 35, line 5, strike, ``of new office''. SEC. 133. REDESIGNATION OF POSITION AS ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR DEMOCRACY, HUMAN RIGHTS, AND LABOR. Strike subsection (b) on page 38; Redesignate subsection (c) on page 38 as ``(b)''; and In the newly redesignated subsection (b), strike ``of new office''. SEC. 142. WAIVER OF LIMITATION FOR CERTAIN CLAIMS. In subsection (a), page 48, line 16, strike ``arise from'' and insert ``in circumstances where there is in effect''. SEC. 147. EDUCATIONAL TRAVEL FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS STUDYING ABROAD. In subsection (b), page 52, line 6, insert the following after ``enrolled'': ``, with the allowable travel expense not to exceed the cost of travel to and from the school in the United States''. SEC. 154. FOREIGN LANGUAGE TRANSLATOR AND INTERPRETER CAREER SERVICE PROGRAM. In subsection (e), on page 64, line 2, strike ``(1)''; In subsection (e), on page 64, line 9, strike the entire line and insert ``(f) Use of Funds.--''; Funds collected under the authority of subsections (d) and''; In newly designated subsection (f), on page 64, line 16, add the following at the end: ``Such funds may remain available until expended.''; and On page 64, lines 17-19, strike subsection (f). SEC. 169. REPORT ON UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING ACTIVITIES. At the beginning of the section, on page 76, line 11, strike ``Not'' and insert the following: ``(a) Except as modified by subsection (b), not''; On page 76, line 19, insert before the period ``for the previous fiscal year''; On page 76, line 22, strike ``as of the date of'' and insert ``covered by''; On page 76, line 23, insert ``such'' before ``peacekeeping''; and On page 77, insert the following new subsection at the end of section 169: ``(b) The first report submitted pursuant to this section shall cover all United Nations peacekeeping operations up to the date of the report.'' SEC. 170. UNITED STATES PERSONNEL AND MATERIAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS. Strike section 170 in its entirety. SEC. 214. PROHIBITION ON DISCRIMINATORY CONTRACTS. In subsection (b), on page 110, line 10, strike ``on'' and insert ``of''; and In subsection (d), on page 112, line 9, strike ``OF'' and insert ``AND''. SEC. 704. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO CAPTIVE NATIONS RESOLUTION. Strike section 704 in its entirety. SEC. 710. ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS AGAINST NORTH KOREA. Strike subsection (b) on page 176 and insert the following: ``(b) Waiver.--The President may waive the application of subsection (a) if the President determines that such a waiver would serve the national interest.''. At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``SEC. . PUBLISHING INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS. Section 112a of title 1 of the United States Code is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' immediately before ``The Secretary of State''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(b) The Secretary of State may determine that publication of certain categories of agreements is not required, provided that the following criteria are met: ``(1) such agreements are not treaties which have been brought into force for the United States after having received Senate advice and consent pursuant to section 2(2) of Article II of the Constitution of the United States; ``(2) the public interest in such agreements is insufficient to justify their publication, in that (i) as of the date of enactment of this legislation,the agreements are no longer in force, (ii) the agreements do not create private rights or duties, nor establish standards intended to govern government action in the treatment of private individuals; (iii) in view of the limited or specialized nature of the public interest in such agreements, such interest can adequately be satisfied by an alternative means; or (iv) the public disclosure of the text of the agreement would, in the opinion of the President, be prejudicial to the national security of the United States; and ``(3) copies of such agreements (other than those in subsection (2)(b)(iv)), including certified copies where necessary for litigation or similar purposes, can be made available by the Department of State union reasonable request. ``(c) Any determination pursuant to subsection (b) shall be published in the Federal Register.''. At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``Sec. . Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.--The President is authorized to implement, for the United States, the provisions of Annex 1 of the Decision concerning Legal Capacity and Privileges and Immunities, issued by the Council of Ministers of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe on December 1, 1993, in accordance with the terms of that Annex.'' At the appropriate place in the bill, add the following new section: ``Sec. . Agreement on State and Local Taxation.--The President is authorized to bring into force for the United States the Agreement on State and Local Taxation of Foreign Employees of Public International Organizations, which was signed by the United States on April 21, 1992: Provided, That, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 1.B of such Agreement, such Agreement shall not require any refunds of monies paid with respect to tax years ending on or before December 31, 1993.'' SEC. XX. FEES FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICES. Title I of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2669 et seq.) is amended by adding the following new section at the end: ``SEC. 52. FEES FOR COMMERCIAL SERVICES. ``(a) Authority To Charge Fee.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary of State is authorized to charge a fee to cover the actual or estimated cost of providing any person, firm or organization (other than agencies of the United States Government) with commercial services at posts abroad on matters within the authority of the Department of State. ``(2) The authority of this section may be exercised only in countries where the Department of Commerce does not perform commercial services for which it collects fees. ``(b) use of Fees.--Funds collected under the authority of subsection (a) shall be deposited as an offsetting collection to any Department of State appropriation to recover the costs of providing commercial services.'' ``SEC. . PERSONAL SERVICES CONTRACTS ABROAD. ``Section 2(c) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2669(c)) is amended by inserting the following before the period: ``; and such contracts are authorized to be negotiated, the terms of the contracts to be prescribed, and the work to be performed, where necessary, without regard to such statutory provisions as relate to the negotiation, making, and performance of contracts and performance of work in the United States''. At the appropriate place in the bill, insert the following new section: ``SEC. . UNITED STATES MEMBERSHIP IN THE INTERNATIONAL COPPER STUDY GROUP. (a) United States Membership.--The President is authorized to accept the Terms of Reference of and maintain membership of the United States in the International Copper Study Group (ICSG). (b) Payments of Assessed Contributions.--For fiscal year 1995 and thereafter the United States assessed contributions to the ICSG may be paid from funds appropriated for ``Contributions to International Organizations''. Amendment to section 154, Foreign Language Translator and Interpreter Career Service Program. In subsection (e), on page 64, lines 6-9, strike ``for which the Secretary of State has determined for purposes of subsection (b)(2) there is a shortage of qualified Government personnel''; On page 64, lines 12-14, strike ``for which the Secretary has determined there is a shortage of qualified Government personnel''. ______ MACK (AND LIEBERMAN) AMENDMENT NO. 1293
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Mack for himself and Lieberman) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. . AMENDMENTS TO THE PLO COMMITMENTS COMPLIANCE ACT. The PLO Commitments Compliance Act of 1989 (title VIII of Public Law 101-246) is amended-- (1) in section 804(b), by striking ``Beginning 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 120 days thereafter in which the dialogue between the United States and the PLO has not been discontinued'', and inserting in lieu thereof ``In conjunction with each written policy justification required under section (3)(b)(1) of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994 or every 180 days,''; (2) in section 804(b)(1), by striking ``regarding the cessation of terrorism and recognition of Israel's right to exist'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``and each of the commitments described in section (4)(A) of the Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994 (Oslo commitments)''; (3) in section 804(b)(2), by inserting ``and Oslo'' after ``Geneva''; (4) by striking paragraphs (3) and (8) of section 804(b); (5) by redesignating paragraphs (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), and (10) of section 804(b) as paragraphs (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), and (8), respectively of that section; (6) in section 802(8), by inserting ``and on September 9, 1993'' after ``1998''; (7) in section 802, by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (10); (8) by striking ``and'' at the end of section 802(7); and (9) by inserting after section 802(7) the following: ``(8) the President, following an attempted terrorist attack upon a Tel Aviv beach on May 30, 1990, suspended the United States dialogue with the PLO; ``(9) the President resumed the United States dialogue with the PLO in response to the commitments made by the PLO in letters to the Prime Minister of Israel and the Foreign Minister of Norway of September 9, 1993; and''. ______ PELL (AND HELMS) AMENDMENT NO. 1294
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Pell for himself and Helms) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE. This act may be cited as the ``Middle East Peace Facilitation Act of 1994''. SEC. 2. FINDINGS. The Congress finds that-- (1) the Palestine Liberation Organization has recognized the State of Israel's right to exist in peace and security and to amend its covenant to recognize that fact; accepted United Nations Security Council resolutions 242 and 338; committed itself to the peace process and peaceful coexistence with Israel, free from violence and all other acts which endanger peace and stability; and assumed responsibility over all Palestine Liberation Organization elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations, and discipline violators; (2) Israel has recognized the Palestine Liberation Organization as the representative of the Palestinian people; (3) Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed a Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements on September 13, 1993, at the White House; (4) the United States has resumed a bilateral dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization; and (5) in order to implement the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements and facilitate the Middle East peace process, the President has requested flexibility to suspend certain provisions of law pertaining to the Palestine Liberation Organization. SECTION 3. AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND CERTAIN PROVISIONS. (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), beginning July 1, 1994, the President may suspend for a period of not more than 180 days any provision of law specified in subsection (c). The President may continue the suspension for a period or periods of not more than 180 days if, before each such period, the President satisfies the requirements of subjection (b). Any suspension shall cease to be effective after 180 days, or at such earlier date as the President may specify. (b) Conditions.-- (1) Consultation.--Prior to each exercise of the authority provided in subsection (a), the President shall consult with the relevant congressional committees. The President may not exercise that authority until 30 days after a written policy justification is submitted to the relevant Congressional Committees. (2) Presidential certification.--The President may exercise the authority provided in subsection (a) only if the President certifies to the relevant congressional committees each time he exercises such authority that-- (A) it is in the national interest of the United States to exercise such authority; and (B) the Palestine Liberation Organization continues to abide in good faith by all the commitments described in paragraph (4). (3) Requirement for continuing plo compliance.--Any suspension under subsection (a) of a provision of law specified in subsection (c) shall cease to be effective if the President certifies to the relevant congressional committees, or if the Congress determines by Joint Resolution, that the Palestine Liberation Organization has not continued to abide in good faith by all the commitments described in paragraph (4). (A) Any joint resolution under this subsection shall be considered in the Senate in accordance with the provisions of section 601(b) of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976. (B) For the purpose of expediting the consideration and enactment of joint resolutions under this subsection, a motion to proceed to the consideration of any such joint resolution after it has been reported by the appropriate committee shall be treated as highly privileged in the House of Representatives. (4) PLO commitments described.--The commitments referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are the commitments made by the Palestine Liberation Organization-- (A) in its letter of September 9, 1993, to the Prime Minister of Israel; in its letter of September 9, 1993, to the Foreign Minister of Norway to-- (i) recognize the right of the State of Israel to exist in peace and security; (ii) accept United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338; (iii) renounce the use of terrorism and other acts of violence; (iv) assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations and discipline violators; (v) call upon the Palestinian people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to take part in the steps leading to the normalization of life, rejecting violence and terrorism, and contributing to peace and stability; and (vi) submit to the Palestine National Council for formal approval the necessary changes to the Palestinian Covenant regarding recognizing Israel's right to exist in peace and security, and (B) in, and resulting from the implementation of, the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements signed on September 13, 1993. (c) Provisions That May Be Suspended.--The provisions that may be suspended under the authority of subsection (a) are the following: (1) Section 307 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2227) as it applies with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization or entities associated with it. (2) Section 114 of the Department of State Authorization Act, Fiscal years 1984 and 1985 (22 U.S.C. 287e note) as it applies with respect to the Palestine Liberation Organization or entities associated with it. (3) Section 1003 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, fiscal years 1988 and 1989 (22 U.S.C. 5202). (4) Section 37 of the Bretton Woods Agreement Act (22 U.S.C. 286w) as it applies to the granting to the Palestine Liberation Organization of observer status or other official status at any meeting sponsored by or associated with the International Monetary Fund. As used in this paragraph, the term ``other official status'' does not include membership in the International Monetary Fund. (d) Relevant Congressional Committees Defined.--As used in this section, the term ``relevant congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate. ______ DOMENICI AMENDMENT NO. 1295
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Domenici) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 25, between lines 10 and 11 insert: (4) No fees or surcharge authorized under subsection (a)(1) may be charged to a national of a country that is a signatory to the North American Free-Trade Agreement. ______ McCAIN (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 1296
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for McCain for himself, Lieberman, D'Amato, and Cochran) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place in the bill, insert the following new title: IRAN-IRAQ ARMS NON-PROLIFERATION AMENDMENTS OF 1994 SEC. 01. SHORT TITLE, REFERENCES IN ACT. (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Iran- Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Amendments of 1994.'' (b) Reference in Title.--Except as specifically provided in this title, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed as an amendment to or repeal of a provision, the reference shall be deemed to be made to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993. SEC. 02. STATEMENT OF POLICY. It is the policy of the United States to halt the proliferation of advanced conventional weapons within Iran and Iraq. SEC. 03. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this title to impose additional sanctions against those foreign countries and persons that transfer destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons, or goods and technology that assist in enhancing the capabilities of Iran and Iraq to manufacture and deliver such weapons. SEC. 04. SANCTIONS AGAINST PERSONS. Section 1604 is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Prohibition.--If the President determines that any person has transferred or retransferred goods or technology so as to contribute knowingly and materially to the efforts by Iran or Iraq (or any agency or instrumentality of either such country) to acquire destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons, then-- ``(1) the sanctions described in subsection (b) shall be imposed; and ``(2) the President may apply, in the discretion of the President, the sanctions described in subsection (c). ``(b) Mandatory Sanctions.--The sanctions to be imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) are as follows: ``(1) Procurement sanction.--Except as provided in subsection (d), the United States Government shall not procure directly or indirectly, or enter into any contract for the procurement of, any goods or services from the sanctioned person. ``(2) Export sanction.--The United States Government shall not issue any license for any export by or to the sanctioned person. ``(c) Discretionary Sanctions.--The sanctions referred to in subsection (a)(2) are as follows: ``(1) Transiting united states territory.-- (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law (other than a treaty or other international agreement), no employee or official of a sanctioned person and no good or technology that is manufactured, produced, sold, or shipped by the sanctioned person may transit by vessel or aircraft any territory subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. The Secretary of Transportation may promulgate regulations, as necessary, to provide for the implementation of this sanction in the most effective manner. (B) The Secretary of Transportation may provide for such exceptions from this paragraph as the Secretary considers in the interest of the United States. ``(2) Financial institutions.--(A) The President may by order prohibit any depositary institution that is chartered by, or that has its principal place of business within, a State or the United States from making any loan or providing any credit to the sanctioned person, except for loans or credits for the purpose of purchasing food or other agricultural commodities. ``(B) As used in this paragraph, the term `depository institution' means a bank or savings association, as defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. ``(3) Use of authorities of the international emergency economic powers act.--The President may exercise the authorities of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to prohibit any transaction involving any property in which the sanctioned person has any interest whatsoever except for transactions involving the provision of humanitarian assistance. ``(4) Prohbition on vessels that enter ports of sanctioned countries to engage in trade.-- ``(A) In General.--Beginning on the 10th day after a sanction is imposed under this Act against a country, a vessel which enters a port or place in the sanctioned country to engage in the trade of goods or services may not if the President so requires within 180 days after departure from such port or place in the sanctioned country, load or unload any freight at any place in the United States. ``(B) Definitions.--As used in this paragraph, the term `vessel' includes every description of water craft or other contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation in water, but does not include aircraft. ``(d) Exceptions.--The sanction described in subsection (b)(1) shall not apply-- ``(1) in the case of procurement of defense articles or defense services-- ``(A) under existing contracts or subcontracts, including the exercise of options for production quantities to satisfy operational military requirements essential to the national security of the United States; ``(B) if the President determines that the person or other entity to which the sanctions would otherwise be applied is a sole source supplier of the defense articles or services, that the defense articles or services are essential, and that alternative sources are not readily or reasonably available; or ``(C) if the President determines that such articles or services are essential to the national security under defense coproduction agreements; ``(2) to products or services provided under contracts entered into before the date on which the President makes a determination under subsection (a), ``(3) in the case of contracts entered into before the date on which the President makes a determination under subsection (a), with respect to-- ``(A) spare parts which are essential to United States products or production; or ``(B) component parts, but not finished products essential to United States products or production; or ``(C) routine servicing and maintenance of products, to the extent that alternatives sources are not readily or reasonably available; ``(4) to information and technology essential to United States products or production; or ``(5) to medical or other humanitarian items. ``(e) Consultation With and Actions by Foreign Government of Jurisdiction.-- ``(1) Consultations.--Whenever the President makes a determination under subsection (a) with respect to a foreign person, the Congress urges the President-- ``(A) to initiate consultations immediately with the government with primary jurisdiction over that foreign person with respect to the imposition of sanctions pursuant to this section; and, as appropriate, ``(B) to take steps in the United Nations and other multilateral groups to negotiate comprehensive multilateral sanctions pursuant to the provisions of chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter, including a partial or complete embargo, against the government of the foreign country of primary jurisdiction over that sanctioned person, as long as that government has not taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the sanctioned person or firm in the activities described in section 1604(a). ``(2) Actions by Government of Jurisdiction.--In order to pursue such consultations with the government, the President may delay imposition of sanctions pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) for up to 90 days. Following these consultations, the President shall impose sanctions immediately unless the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government has taken specific and effective actions, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the foreign person in the activities described in subsection (a). The President may delay the imposition of sanctions for up to an additional 90 days if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that that government is in the process of taking the actions described in the preceding sentence. ``(3) Report to congress.--Not later than 90 days after the application of sanctions under this section, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the status of consultations with the appropriate government under this subsection, and the basis for any determination under paragraph (2) of this subsection that such government has taken specific corrective action.'' SEC. 05. SANCTIONS AGAINST CERTAIN FOREIGN COUNTRIES. Section 1605 is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``sanction'' and inserting ``sanctions''; (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking ``sanction.--The sanction referred to in subsection (a)(2) is'' and inserting ``sanctions.--The sanctions referred to in subsection (a)(2) are''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(3) Denial of most-favored-nation status.-- Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the President may suspend the application of nondiscriminatory trade agreement (most-favored-nation status) to the sanctioned country for such time as the President so determines. ``(4) Diplomatic relations.--The President is urged to downgrade or suspend diplomatic relations between the United States and the government of the sanctioned country. ``(5) Suspension of special trade privileges.--The President is authorized to suspend special trade privileges which were extended pursuant to the Generalized Systems of Preferences or the Caribbean Basin Initiative. ``(6) Suspension of trade agreements.--The President is authorized to suspend any trade agreement with the sanctioned country. ``(7) Revocations of licenses for export of nuclear material.--The Nuclear Regulatory Commission is authorized to revoke any license for the export of nuclear material pursuant to a nuclear cooperation agreement with the sanctioned country. ``(8) Presidential action regarding aviation.-- (A)(i) The President is authorized to notify the government of a sanctioned country of his intention to suspend the authority of foreign air carriers owned or controlled by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States. ``(ii) The President is authorized to direct the Secretary of Transportation to suspend at the earliest possible date the authority of any foreign air carrier owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by that government to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States, notwithstanding any agreement relating to air services. ``(B)(i) The President may direct the Secretary of State to terminate any air service agreement between the United States and a sanctioned country in accordance with the provisions of that agreement. ``(ii) Upon termination of an agreement under this subparagraph, the Secretary of Transportation is authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to revoke at the earliest possible date the right of any foreign air carrier owned, or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the government of that country to engage in foreign air transportation to or from the United States. ``(C) The President may direct the Secretary of Transportation to provide for such exceptions from this subsection as the President considers necessary to provide for emergencies in which the safety of an aircraft or its crew or passengers is threatened. ``(D) For purposes of this paragraph, the terms `aircraft', `air carrier', `air transportation', and `foreign air carrier' have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. 1301). ``(9) Other sanctions.--The President may apply the sanctions described in section 1605(c) with respect to actions of a foreign government.'' SEC. 06. WAIVER. Section 1606 is amended-- (1) ``by striking ``waiver'' each place it appears and inserting ``modification, and waiver''; and (2) by striking ``waive'' each place it appears and inserting ``modify or waive''. SEC. 07. TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1606 the following new section: ``SEC. 1606A. TERMINATION OF SANCTIONS. ``Except as otherwise provided in this title, the sanctions imposed pursuant to the Act shall apply for a period of at least 24 months following the imposition of sanctions and shall cease to apply thereafter only if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that-- ``(1) reliable information indicates that the government of jurisdiction has taken specific and effective action, including appropriate penalties, to terminate the involvement of the sanctioned person in the sanctionable activity. ``(2) The President has received reliable assurances from the sanctioned government that such government will not, in the future, violate this Act.'' SEC. 08. STAY OF SANCTIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1607 the following new section: (a) Criterion for Stay.--The President may stay the imposition of any sanction on any entity in order to protect-- (1) ongoing criminal investigations, or (2) sensitive intelligence sources and methods which are being used to acquire further information on the proliferation of advanced conventional weapons, weapons of mass destruction, or missiles that would be comprised by the publication of the sanctioned entity's name. (a) Determination.--The President shall exercise the authority described in paragraph (1) only when the President determines that the non-proliferation goals of the Act are better served by delaying the imposition of sanctions rather than by compromising the criminal investigation or intelligence sources and methods at issue. (c) Lifting of Stay.--The President shall lift any stay imposed pursuant to this subsection as soon as the basis for the determination made pursuant to paragraph (2) no longer exists. (d) Notification and Report to Congress.--Whenever the duration of any stay imposed pursuant to this subsection exceeds 120 days, the President shall promptly report to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives the rationale and circumstances that led the President to exercise the stay authority. SEC. 09. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Act is amended by inserting after section 1607 the following new section: ``SEC. 1607A. RULES AND REGULATIONS. ``The President is authorized to prescribe such rules and regulations as the President may require to carry out this Act.'' SEC. 10. DEFINITIONS. Section 1608 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) The terms `goods and technology' includes any item of the type that is listed on the Nuclear Referral List under section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978, the United States Munitions List (established in section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act), or the MTCR Annex (as defined in section 74(4) of the Arms Export Control Act) or any item that is subject to licensing by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. ``(9) The term `United States' includes territories and possessions of the United States and the customs waters of the United States, as defined in section 401 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1401). ______ MURRAY (AND GORTON) AMENDMENT NO. 1297
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Murray for herself and Gorton) proposed an amendment to the bill, S. 1281, supra, as follows: At the appropriate place in the bill insert: SEC. . REIMBURSEMENT OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS Section 208 of title 3, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Out of funds otherwise available for fiscal year 1994 and fiscal year 1995 for ``Protection of Foreign Missions and Officials'', the Secretary of State is authorized to reimburse the City of Seattle and State of Washington up to a total of $440,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $500,000 for fiscal year 1995 for unexpected extraordinary security costs associated with the change in the level of the participation in the Asian Pacific Cooperation conference held in Seattle in November 1993 from Ministerial to Heads-of-State. ______ McCAIN AMENDMENT NO. 1298
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for McCain) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page , between lines and , insert the following: Sec. . (a) Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran receives material, logistic, and financial support from the Iraq Government. (2) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran has been involved in terrorist activities since the inception of the organization in 1963. (3) During the past 30 years, terrorist activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran have resulted in the deaths of more than 10,000 Iranians. (4) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran is responsible for the deaths of several United States military advisers in 1972 and 1973, for the deaths of two Air Force officers in 1975, and for the deaths of three United States employees of the Rockwell International Corporation in 1976. (5) The People's Mujaheddin of Iran actively and vigorously supported the seizure of the United States Embassy in Tehran, Iran, in 1979. (6) The Department of State informally recognizes the involvement of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran in international terrorist activities and has refused contact with representatives of the organization. (7) The annual report of the Secretary of State on terrorist activities does not provide adequate information on the terrorist activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. (8) The past activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran, and the current policy of the Department of State and respect to the organization, create a presumption that the organization is currently engaged in international terrorist activities. (b) Except as provided in subsection (d), the annual report of the Secretary of State that is submitted to Congress on April 30, 1994, under section 140 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989 (Public Law 100-204; 22 U.S.C. 2656f) shall include information referred to in subsection (c) on the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. (c) The report referred to in subsection (b) shall include-- (1) an assessment of the activities of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of such section 140; and (2) any other relevant information on the People's Mujaheddin of Iran referred to in subsection (a)(2) of such section 140, including a detailed discussion of each of the matters referred to in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (b)(2) of such section. (d) The Secretary may elect not to include the information referred to in subsection (c) in the report referred to in subsection (b). In the event of such an election, the Secretary shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a justification for such election. (e) In the event of an election under subsection (d), not less than sixty days from the submittal of the report referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary shall submit an unclassified report to Congress detailing the structure, current activities, external support and history of the People's Mujaheddin of Iran. Such report shall include any connection to organizations operating in the United States. (f) In this section, the term ``People's Mujaheddin of Iran'' mean the organization also known as the Mujaheddin-e Khalq that is based in Iraq and led to Iranian expatriots Massoud Rajavi or Maryam Rajavi and includes any group or organization associated with such organization, including the Iraqi-based National Liberation Army and the National Council of Resistance of Iran. ______ BINGAMAN AMENDMENT NO. 1299
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Bingaman) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. 714. NOTIFICATION OF CONGRESS ON CERTAIN EVENTS INVOLVING THE MTCR. (A) Export in Support of Space Launch Vehicle (SLV) Programs.--At least 30 days before the export of any item controlled pursuant to United States obligations under the Missile Technology Control Regime and intended to support the design, development, or production of a Category I system, as defined in the MTCR Annex, to be utilized for the launch of satellites into space, the President shall transmit to Congress a report describing the proposed export and the rationale for approving such export, including the consistency of such export with United States missile nonproliferation policy. The President may waive the 30-day waiting period in any case in which the President certifies in the report that the national security interests of the United States necessitate immediate approval of the export or that the export represents the continuation of a long- standing relationship with an MTCR partner. (b) United States Position Regarding Admission of New MTCR Members.--At least 30 days before the United States takes the position to favor the admission of a particular country into the Missile Technology Control Regime, the President shall transmit to Congress a report describing the rationale for such position together with all relevant information concerning that country's non-proliferation policies, practices, and commitments. The President may waive the 30- day waiting period in any case in which the President certifies in the report that the national security interests of the United States necessitate immediate approval of the new member. (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the terms ``Missile Technology Control Regime'' and ``MTCR'' mean the policy statement, between the United States, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, Italy, Canada, and Japan, announced on April 16, 1987, to restrict sensitive missile-relevant transfers based on the MTCR Annex, and any amendments thereto; and (2) the term ``MTCR Annex'' means the Guidelines and Equipment and Technology Annex of the MTCR, and any amendments thereto. ______ DeCONCINI (AND WARNER) AMENDMENT NO. 1300
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for DeConcini for himself and Warner) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 43, beginning on line 22, strike section 138 of the bill. On page 3, strike from the table of contents of the bill the item relating to section 138. ______ SIMON AMENDMENT NO. 1301
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Simon) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 65, after line 12, insert the following new section: SEC. 155. ASSIGNMENT OF FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICERS WITH ADVANCED PROFICIENCY IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. (a) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to encourage the assignment of Foreign Service personnel with language proficiency at the S4/R4 level (full professional proficiency, as tested by the Foreign Service Institute) to posts or positions in which their language capabilities are effectively utilized. (b) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Department of State's Office of the Inspector General noted, in its July 1993 report, that existing foreign language proficiency among members of the Foreign Service is not adequately weighed in the assignments process, and that existing skills are not adequately utilized, and (2) the Department of State's Office of the Inspector General urged that the Department has legitimate requirements at overseas posts that can only be satisfied through S4/R4 level skills, and recommended that certain overseas positions be designated at the S4/R4 competence level. (c) Program.--(1) Pursuant to section 702 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4022), the Secretary of State shall direct the establishment and apportionment of a certain number of overseas positions, at the S4/R4 level, in each of a majority of overseas missions, as follows: (A) For missions using world languages with more than nine Foreign Service Officer positions assigned by the Department of State, 8 percent of positions and not less than one position will be established at the S4/R4 level. (B) For posts using hard or incentive languages, with more than nine Foreign Service Officer positions assigned by the Department of State, the number of S4/R4-designated positions shall be at least 4 percent of positions, and not less than one position. (2) Overseas posts and the Department of State shall retain flexibility to apportion S4/R4 language-designated positions within respective overseas posts. (3) Assignment of personnel with full professional proficiency shall be completed not later than September 30, 1995. (d) Report to the Congress.--The Secretary of State shall report to the Congress not later than September 30, 1994, describing the progress made toward implementation of this section. ______ WOFFORD (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 1302
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Wofford for himself, Kennedy, Lieberman, and Dole) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, below line 6, add the following new section: SEC. 714. SENSE OF SENATE ON THE PEACE PROCESS IN NORTHERN IRELAND. (a) Findings.--The Senate makes the following findings: (1) The people of Northern Ireland, Ireland, and Great Britain earnestly seek a peaceful end to a conflict in the North of Ireland which has caused more than 3,000 deaths since 1969. (2) The people of the United States, many of whom share a common ancestry and cultural roots with the people of Northern Ireland, Ireland, and Great Britain, are deeply concerned about the continuing conflict and desire to facilitate an early resolution to the conflict. (3) In 1993, John Hume, head of the Social Democratic and Labour Party and Gerry Adams, President of Sinn Fein, conducted talks on the conflict. (4) These talks were a significant contribution to a climate encouraging peace in the North of Ireland. (5) The Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of Ireland have held talks on Northern Ireland culminating in the Joint Declaration issued by the two governments on December 15, which declaration offers a framework for lasting peace in the region. (b) Sense of Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that the United States should strongly encourage all parties to the conflict in the North of Ireland to renounce violence and to participate in the current search for peace in the region. ______ BRADLEY AMENDMENT NO. 1303
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Bradley) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 9, between lines 4 and 5, insert the following: (4) Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated for ``Salaries and Expenses'' under subsection (a)(2), $300,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 and 1995 is authorized to be available for the recruitment by the Department of State of Hispanic American students from United States institutions of higher education (as defined in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965) with a high percentage enrollment of Hispanic Americans for the purpose of training such individuals for careers in the Foreign Service and international affairs. ______ McCAIN AND GORTON AMENDMENT NO. 1304
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for McCain for himself and Gorton) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following: SEC. 714. RESTORATION OF WITHHELD BENEFITS. (a) Eligibility.--With respect to any person for which the Secretary of State and the Secretary concerned within the Department of Defense has approved the employment or the holding of a position pursuant to the provisions of Section 1058, title 10, United States Code, before the date of enactment of this Act, the consents, approvals and determinations under that section shall be deemed to be effective as of January 1, 1993. (b) Technical Correction.--Subsection (d) of section 1433 of Public Law 103-160 is repealed. ______ LEVIN (AND OTHERS) AMENDMENT NO. 1305
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Levin for himself, Riegle, and Wofford) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 129, after line 6, add the following new section: SEC. . EXTENSION OF THE FAIR TRADE IN AUTO PARTS ACT OF 1988. (a) In General.--Section 2125 of the Fair Trade in Auto Parts Act of 1988 (15 U.S.C. 4704) is amended by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``1998''. (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on December 30, 1993. ______ HELMS AMENDMENT NO. 1306
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Helms) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, insert the following: SEC. 714. REPORT ON THE USE OF FOREIGN FROZEN OR BLOCKED ASSETS. No later than 30 days after enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report containing a detailed accounting analysis and justification for all expenditures made from foreign governments' assets that have been frozen or blocked by the United States Government, including but not limited to those expenditures made from Haitian frozen or blocked assets by the Government of President Jean Bertrand Aristide, and those made from Iranian and Iraqi frozen or blocked assets. LUGAR AMENDMENT NO. 1307
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Lugar) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 12, line 3, strike ``$14,200,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$16,200,000''. ______ BAUCUS AMENDMENT NO. 1308
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Baucus) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place in this Act insert the following: It is the sense of the Senate that the President has determined that sustainable development is one of the goals of United States foreign policy and therefore, the United States, in conducting bilateral and multilateral negotiations, should to the maximum extent feasible, take into consideration the principles of sustainable development that encourage broad based economic growth, protect the environment, build human capital and knowledge, and promote democratic participation and development. It is the further sense of the Senate that domestic producers of environmental goods and services should, to the maximum extent practicable, be notified of any potential business opportunities which result from United States bilateral and multilateral assistance programs and negotiations. ______ GREGG AMENDMENT NO. 1309
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Gregg) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 101, line 24, strike ``$2,000,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$1,000,000''. On page 102, line 12, strike ``$4,500,000'' and insert in lieu thereof ``$1,500,000''. ______ KENNEDY (AND SIMPSON) AMENDMENT NO. 1310
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Kennedy for himself and Simpson) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; and follows: On page 42, strike out lines 5 through 11 and insert in lieu thereof the following: (a) Coordination of Refugee Affairs.--Section 301 of the Refugee Act of 1980 (8 U.S.C. 1525) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec. 301. (a) The Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall-- ``(1) develop overall United States refugee admission and resettlement policy; ``(2) coordinate all United States domestic and international refugee admission and resettlement programs in a manner that assures that policy objectives are met in a timely fashion; ``(3) develop an effective and responsive liaison between the Federal Government and voluntary organizations, Governors and mayors, and others involved in refugee relief and resettlement work to reflect overall United States Government policy; and ``(4) make recommendations to the President and to the Congress with respect to policies for, objectives of, and establishment of priorities for, Federal functions relating to refugee admission and resettlement in the United States. ``(b) In the conduct of the duties described in subsection (a), the Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall consult regularly with States, localities, and private nonprofit voluntary agencies concerning the sponsorship process and the intended distribution of refugees. ``(c) The Secretary of State, together with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Attorney General, shall design an overall budget strategy to provide individual agencies with policy guidance on refugee matters in the preparation of their budget requests, and to provide the Office of Management and Budget with an overview of all refugee-related budget requests.''. (b) Amendments to the Refugee Act of 1980.--Title III of the Refugee Act of 1980 is amended-- (1) in the title heading, by striking ``UNITED STATES COORDINATOR FOR REFUGEE AFFAIRS'' and inserting ``UNITED STATES COORDINATION OF REFUGEE AFFAIRS''; and (2) in the heading of part A, by striking ``United States Coordinator for Refugee Affairs'' and inserting ``United States Coordination of Refugee Affairs''. On page 43, line 4, before the semicolon, insert ``and inserting `, together with the Secretary of State,'''. ______ KENNEDY (AND SIMPSON) AMENDMENT NO. 1311
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Kennedy and Simpson) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place in the bill insert the following sections: Section 1. Section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, 8 U.S.C. 1255, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(i) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (c) of this section, an alien physically present in the United States who (A) entered the United States without inspection; or (B) is within one of the classes enumerated in subsection (c) of this section may apply to the Attorney General for the adjustment of his or her status to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. The Attorney General may accept such application only if the alien remits with such application a sum equalling five times the fee required for the processing of applications under this section as of the date of receipt of the application The sum specified herein shall be in addition to the fee normally required for the processing of an application under this section. ``(2) Upon receipt of such an application and the sum hereby required, the Attorney General may adjust the status of the alien to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence if (A) the alien is eligible to receive an immigrant visa and is admissible to the United States for permanent residence; and (B) an immigrant visa is immediately available to the alien at the time the application is filed. ``(3) Sums remitted to the Attorney General pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection shall be disposed of by the Attorney General as provided in sections 286 (m), (n), and (o) of this Title.'' Sec. 2. Section 212 (a) (9) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, 8 U.S.C. 1182 (a) (9), is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(D) An alien applying for an immigrant visa who has been physically present in the United States within the ninety day period immediately preceding the date of such application is excludable.'' ____________________
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Grassley) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 94, strike out lines 3 through 12 and insert in lieu thereof the following: (a) In General.--Section 140(a) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989 (22 U.S.C. 2656f(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively; (3) by inserting ``(1)'' immediately after ``TERRORISM.-- ''; (4) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (5) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``; and''; and (6) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) the nature and extent of assets held in the United States on behalf of foreign countries and groups responsible for the acts described in subparagraphs (A) and (B). ``(2) In reporting on the information required by paragraph (1)(C), the Secretary of State shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, and such other heads of relevant departments and agencies of the United States as may be necessary.''. (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 140(b) of such Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(A)''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(1)(B)''. ______ HELMS AMENDMENT NO. 1313
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Helms) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1313, supra; as follows: At the appropriate place, add the following: ``SEC. . PASSPORT SECURITY. (a) It is the Sense of the Congress that the Department of State is strongly urged to assure that any new passport issuances should, to the maximum extent practicable: 1) be secure against counterfeiting, alteration, duplication or simulation; 2) be easily verifiable with appropriate inspection by public officials and private and commercial personnel; and 3) contain only American-sourced materials and technology. (b) The Secretary of State shall provide a report to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and the House Committee on Foreign Affairs with 30 days of enactment detailing actions taken by the Department to accomplish the goals set forth in subsection (a).''. ______ LUGAR (AND DOLE) AMENDMENT NO. 1314
 
The speaker is KERRY and he says  (for Lugar and Dole) proposed an amendment to the bill S. 1281, supra; as follows: On page 179, after line 6, add the following new section: SEC. . SAFETY OF UNITED STATES PERSONNEL IN SARAJEVO. (A) Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the United States has recognized and established diplomatic relations with the Government of Bosnia- Hercegovina; (2) the United States Ambassador to Bosnia-Hercegovina does not have any secure permanent or semipermanent facilities to conduct United States diplomatic activities in Sarajevo; (3) the protracted conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina creates serious physical risks to United States diplomatic personnel serving there; (4) the United States Ambassador to Bosnia-Hercogovina resides and carries out his duties from Vienna, Austria; and (5) an increased and more secure United State diplomatic presence in Sarajevo would enhance United States interests in Bosnia-Hercegovina. (b) Policy.--(1) It is, therefore, the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of State should immediately take steps to increase the presence of United States diplomatic personnel in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Hercegovina. Consistent with the objective of ensuring their physical safety. (2) Such steps should include secure facilities, communication capability, ground transportation and other capabilities, as appropriate, to enable United States diplomatic personnel to conduct regular official United States diplomatic activities in Sarajevo. (c) Report.--The Secretary of State shall report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on the steps taken to enhance the security and safety of United States diplomatic personnel not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act. ____________________
 
The speaker is LEVIN and he says  President, I wish to announce that the Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, Committee on Governmental Affairs, will hold a hearing on Thursday, February 3, 1994, at 9:30 a.m., in room 562 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building. The subject of the hearing is Oversight of United States-Japan Auto Parts Framework Negotiations: What's Needed To Get Results? COMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES
 
The speaker is BUMPERS and he says  President, I would like to announce for the public that a hearing has been scheduled before the Subcommittee on Public Lands, National Parks and Forests of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. The hearing will take place on Thursday, February 10, 1994, beginning at 2 p.m. in room 366 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building in Washington DC. The purpose of the hearing is to receive testimony on the following bills: H.R. 2947, to amend the Commemorative Works Act, and for other purposes; S. 1552, to extend for an additional two years the authorization of the Black Revolutionary War Patriots Foundation to establish a memorial; S. 1612, to extend the authority of the Women in Military Service for America Foundation to establish a memorial in the District of Columbia area; and S. 1790, the National Peace Garden Reauthorization Act. Because of the limited time available for the hearing, witnesses may testify by invitation only. However, those wishing to submit written testimony for the hearing record should send two copies of their testimony to the Subcommittee on Public Lands, National Parks and Forests, Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, United States Senate, 304 Dirksen Senate Office Building, Washington, DC 20510-6150. For further information, please contact David Brooks of the Subcommittee staff at (202) 224-9863. ____________________
 
The speaker is RIEGLE and he says  President, this is a historic year for Congress. Our country has been facing a health care crisis for decades. Based upon my personal experience from holding over 40 hearings on health care and receiving testimony from hundreds of individuals, I can tell you that this crisis does exist and that we must pass comprehensive health care reform. I rise this morning in my continuing effort to put a real face on this health care crisis. Over the past year and a half I have told the stories of over 40 people from Michigan who have had problems with our current health care system. Today I want to tell the story of Stephen Datema, from Grand Rapids, MI. Stephen is facing almost $30,000 in unpaid doctor and hospital bills because of a preexisting condition clause in his insurance policy. Stephen and his wife, Deb, are a typical middle-class working family with four children. Stephen is 38 years old and works for an insurance company as a claims adjuster. Deb is 37 years old and works in their home. Stephen has hereditary coronary artery disease which was discovered in 1988 when he had a heart attack at 33 years old. Between 1988 and 1989, Stephen underwent several angioplasty procedures to open a collapsed artery. At the time he had employer-provided health insurance that covered all of his expenses. In January of last year, Stephen accepted a new job with a higher salary. But he did so only after confirming that he and his family would have good health care benefits. Stephen openly discussed his health condition in an effort to make sure that the company's insurance would cover him if he needed angioplasty treatment again. Stephen's employer informed him that he and his family would be eligible for insurance coverage 30 days after his hiring date. But he and his family did not actually receive health insurance coverage until March 1, almost 2 months later. Fortunately, Stephen and his family stayed healthy during this time. Just recently, after 4 years of relatively good health, Stephen once again required treatment for his condition. In August of last year, Stephen underwent two angioplasty procedures in an attempt to open a collapsed artery. He was hospitalized again in November under similar circumstances. Stephen and Deb were under the impression that their insurance would cover all of his medical bills, but there were problems once the bills were submitted for payment. At first the insurance company denied payment for the bills claiming that they needed more information. It was not until December that the insurance company finally said they would not pay for any of the services rendered in August because of a 6-month preexisting condition clause. Stephen and Deb were stunned. They had no idea a preexisting condition clause even existed in their policy. When Stephen discussed his health condition and his benefits with his future employer, there had been no mention of a preexisting condition clause. As a result of the insurance company denying payment, Stephen and Deb are faced with a $24,000 hospital bill and over $5,000 in cardiologist and emergency room bills. This is a great financial burden for a middle-class family with four children. Deb has asked the hospital if she could work out a payment plan that would allow them to pay off the balance over several years. But the hospital will only accept good faith payments on bills that are less than $5,000. The hospital is going to send Stephen's bills to a collection agency, even though they have made every effort to work out a payment plan with the hospital. Stephen and Deb know that this will ruin their credit record for the rest of their lives. President, all American families deserve to have affordable health care coverage and know that their coverage will be there when they need it. But under our present system, which allows gaps in coverage and preexisting condition clauses, even middle-class families who have insurance can face devastating health care costs. President, we have to comprehensively reform our health care system for all Americans--including middle-class families like the Datemas and the millions of Americans who can't afford coverage at all. And we must do it this year. I am going to invest every once of energy that I have to work with my Democratic and Republican colleagues to iron out a plan that provides comprehensive, continuous, health care coverage for every American. ____________________
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, at a recent press conference, Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Frank Kelso, indicated that the Navy faced a $3.6 billion budget shortfall between fiscal year 1995-99. The admiral, according to a story that appeared in Navy News & Undersea Technology, anticipated that the shortfall would likely force the ``accelerated retirement of older ships and aircraft, the consolidation of training, elimination of the Navy's `Aggressor squadron,' reduced operations for aircraft carrier antisubmarine helicopters, regionalizing maintenance functions, moving ships maintenance from tenders to shoreside facilities, and dropping the number of tenders to 4 from 13.'' There is an easier way. It cannot have been lost on Admiral Kelso that the $3.6 billion shortfall between fiscal year 1995-99 equals almost exactly the $3.4 billion price tag of the CVN-76. Eliminate the CVN-76, and your budget problem disappears. Obviously, this proposal will spark much wailing and gnashing of teeth within the navy and here in Congress, but it is time to ask ourselves whether we need another 90,000-ton, 5,000-man behemoth when the Navy budget is in chaos. We are already gapping presence in forward areas. One less carrier will not profoundly change the balance of power in any given region. Frankly, if we reduced our presence in the Indian Ocean, the real driver of deployments, we could probably increase presence elsewhere. Face it, Saudi Arabia is one huge aircraft carrier with an infrastructure second to none. Carriers are intended to provide airpower outside the range of available land bases, but the Persian Gulf appears to be the one region of the world where carriers are least necessary. And what of the industrial base? The Navy needs to separate jobs programs from preserving critical industries, skills, and tooling. Nuclear propulsion, catapults and arresting gear, and whatever else is unique to carriers may require special attention, but not to the point of justifying yet another Nimitz-class carrier. If the work force at Newport News needs to be preserved, run the America through a Service Life Extension Program. In the meantime, get Newport News and Navy designers cracking on the next generation of aircraft carriers capable of handling a mix of conventional and short take-off and landing aircraft. To survive the current fiscal austerity, bold moves are required. The ``salami slice'' approach to savings outlined by Admiral Kelso is the wrong way to go. Even if every initiative enumerated had merit, and I would argue that not all do, and achieved the saving projected, it is unlikely that the Navy would be able to close the gap between funding and requirements. We can either denude the seas of ships and ships of planes and helicopters, monkey with training and maintenance, and reduce procurement rates to the point where unit costs explode or we can eliminate the CVN-76. The choice is simple. I ask that the article, ``Budget Squeeze Brings Howls,'' be included in the Record. The article follows: [From Navy News & Undersea Technology, Jan. 2, 1994] Budget Squeeze Brings Howls It is probably no coincidence that three hours before Defense Secretary nominee Bobby Inman bowed out--citing among other reasons a budgetary disconnect between future budgets and force levels--the Chief of Naval Operations was making the same point. Adm. Frank Kelso told a press briefing the proposed Navy budgets for fiscal years 1995 to 1999 will leave the service about $3.5 billion short in two critical procurement acounts--shipbuilding and naval aviation. Kelso indicated the shipbuilding budget over the five years will average $6.3 billion per year while the requirements to maintain the force levels outlined in DOD's Bottom-Up Review demands $8.4 billion. Kelso broke out the shortfall: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Fiscal year 1995-99 Future average requirements ------------------------------------------------------------------------ DDG-51.................................. $2.7 $2.5 CVN/refueling........................... 1.2 2.0 SSN..................................... 1.2 2.2 Amphibs................................. 1.0 .7 Other................................... .2 1.0 ------------------------------- Totals............................ 6.3 8.4 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ For aviation, the mismatch is $1.5 billion per year, and is dominated by the need for more F-18 aircraft, as follows: ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Fiscal year 1995-99 Future average requirements ------------------------------------------------------------------------ F-18C/D/E/F............................. $2.2 $3.1 CV & SPPT............................... .9 .5 USN & USMC helos........................ .1 .3 AV-8B................................... .3 .............. V-22.................................... .6 1.0 JAST.................................... .............. .6 APN 5/6/7............................... 2.9 3.0 ------------------------------- Totals............................ 7.0 8.5 ------------------------------------------------------------------------ The APN (aircraft procurement, Navy) 5/6/7 account includes modifications, spares and support. For the past three years, it has run about $2.5 billion annually. The Navy will attempt to make up for the perceived shortfall by continuing its ``recapitalization'' strategy of cutting infrastructure and reducing force levels. Kelso also said the Navy will be an aggressive player in the next round of base closings set for next year. Kelso admitted the recapitalization is not without risk. Base closure could be throttled back due to political considerations, or its costs might be underestimated. New programs could ``suffer from unanticipated inflation,'' while the impact of a declining industrial base could force costs to rise. Other threats to the Navy plan include the potential for a higher operational tempo, causing problems in retaining qualified sailors, or what Kelso called ``DBOF turmoil.'' The Defense Business Operating Fund--established in 1991 to buy services and commodities not included as budget line items-- has caused multi-billion dollar headaches for the Navy (Navy News, 4/26/1993). The final and worst-case threat to matching Navy finances and force structure is increased military tension in the world. Kelso cited several on-going ways the Navy is looking at to reduce expenditures, including the accelerated retirement of older ships and aircraft, the consolidation of training, elimination of the Navy's ``Aggressor squadron,'' reduced operations for aircraft carrier anti-submarine helicopters, regionalizing maintenance functions, moving ship maintenance from tenders to shoreside facilities, and dropping the number of tenders to four from 13. It is uncommon for the Navy's ranking officer to make critical on-the-record comments concerning his upcoming budget submission. That Kelso was willing to ``go public'' might indicate he believes lame-duck Defense Secretary Les Aspin--who resigned for the same budget/forces mismatch that Inman cited--has abandoned the fight for enough money to achieve the force levels outlined in the Bottom-Up Review. ____________________
 
The speaker is D'AMATO and he says  President, I rise to pay tribute to the March of the Living Educational Program. The Holocaust of 1933-45 was a most tragic episode in human history, one of the likes of which we must never allow to recur. Milions perished in the Holocaust; millions of others were never the same afterward. Tens of thousands of American citizens experienced the suffering of the Holocaust first hand, and countless more Americans suffered the loss of loved ones in the Holocaust. Millions of American troops fought against the evil perpetrators of the Holocaust, and the American troops who liberated the concentration camps witnessed first hand the horrors of the Holocaust. Despite all this, there are voices, ominous by their growth, still over 40 years after the fact that claim that the Holocaust never occurred. Against this background stands the March of the Living, a unique program of Holocaust education, a program that dramatically refute the lie that the Holocaust never happened, a program that educates the young to insure that the lessons of the Holocaust are carried into the future, and a program that helps insure that the world will never again display the indifference to human suffering that marked the Holocaust. Since 1988, the March of the Living has taken thousands of teenagers from around the world to view the death camps that have become synonymous with the Holocaust--Auschwitz, Birkenau, and Treblinka. Through the March of the Living, thousands of young adults from Brooklyn to Buffalo in my own State, from Maine to California, from Europe to Australia to South America, have seen the barbed-wire fences, the gas chambers and the crematoria. Through the March of the Living, thousands of teenagers have walked the same 3 kilometers from Auschwitz to Birkenau that the Holocaust victims walked to their deaths. They will never forget the Honocaust, nor will they tolerate the lie that the Holocaust never happened. These teenagers will help insure that nothing of the kind ever happens again. These teenagers, after visiting the death camps of Poland, will visit the State of Israel, a nation that rose from the ashes of the Holocaust, a nation that stands tall as an oasis of democracy in its region, and a nation committed to seeing that there will never be another Holocaust. These teenagers will learn from Israel how the human spirit can triumph over the most terrible adversity. For this unique contribution to Holocaust education and to world education, I salute the March of the Living, and I urge all citizens of the United States to support this most noble educational effort. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I understand that S. 1807 has been introduced and read a first time; is that correct?
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  The Senator is correct.
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I ask that the bill be read a second time and, in behalf of the Republican manager, I object.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Objection is heard. The bill will be read on the next legislative day. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, I ask unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it stand in recess until 1 p.m. on Monday, January 31; that on Monday, following the prayer, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date; that the time for the two leaders be reserved for their use later in the day; that there then be a period for morning business not to extend beyond 1:15 p.m., with Senators permitted to speak therein for up to 5 minutes each, with Senator Gramm of Texas, recognized for up to 10 minutes; that at 1:15 p.m., the Senate then resume consideration of S. 1281, the State Department authorization bill; and that upon the Senate resuming consideration of the bill, Senator Lott be recognized to offer his listed relevant amendment.
 
The speaker is OFFICER and he says  Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. ____________________
 
The speaker is MITCHELL and he says  President, there being no further business to come before the Senate--and I see no other Senator seeking recognition--I now ask unanimous consent that the Senate stand in recess as previously ordered. There being no objection, the Senate, at 4:11 p.m., recessed until Monday, January 31, 1994, at 1 p.m. ____________________
 
S





E





